Anxiety is one of the core topics in our relational spirituality model (RSM) 
of psychotherapy, but when combined with Tillich's existential statement 
above about the anxiety-removing limits of psychotherapy this may not seem 
like a strong selling point. Problems with anxiety are the most common reason 
people seek mental health treatment, and many therapeutic approaches 
have been shown to be empirically effective in reducing symptoms of anxiety. 
However, we locate the RSM within streams of psychodynamic, existential, 
and systemic psychotherapy traditions and the many spiritual, religious, and 
philosophical traditions that invite us to consider the depth functions of 
ontological anxiety in human experience even as we seek to alleviate suffering. 
It is good that we can reduce symptoms of anxiety, yet we believe diversity- 
sensitive treatment aimed at healing and growth requires that we also under-
stand deeper dimensions of anxiety that can ultimately catalyze the relational 
spirituality meaning-reconstruction process for those who are suffering. In this 
chapter, we start by considering differing dynamics of anxiety and trauma and 
then move on to consider diverse existential themes and views of suffering 
than can inform RSM-based treatment.
82 
Relational Spirituality in Psychotherapy
DEPTH AND SURFACE VIEWS OF ANXIETY
The 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
 (5th ed.; 
DSM-5
; Amer-
ican Psychiatric Association, 2013) defines anxiety as "the apprehensive 
anticipation of future danger or misfortune accompanied by a feeling of worry, 
distress, and/or somatic symptoms of tension. The focus of anticipated danger 
may be internal or external" (p. 818). This definition closely connects anxiety 
to worry, distress, and symptomatology and shapes the dominant view in 
Western mental health systems that anxiety is pathological. The existential 
philosopher Soren Kierkegaard (1844/1980a) viewed anxiety much more 
broadly and deeply as ontologically rooted in human finitude and related 
anxiety to the German concept of 
angst
, which implies dread of human 
vulnerability to existential realities such as loss, failure, and death. We would 
call this existential perspective a 
depth view
 of anxiety, and this view suggests 
that anxiety can be problematic but can also serve an important activating 
function in the discovery and construction of meaning related to ultimate 
concerns about life and death (Weems, Costa, Dehon, & Berman, 2004). Sim-
ilarly, existential theologian Paul Tillich (1952) defined anxiety as awareness 
of finitude and suggested that the deepest ontological anxiety is about death, 
disintegration, or losing one's ontological structures in a fall into the nothing-
ness of nonbeing. The quote by Tillich we use to open the chapter reflects the 
existential perspective that ontological anxiety about human finitude needs 
to be faced rather than denied in order to cultivate an integrated sense of 
meaning in the face of suffering and loss. Thus, psychotherapy cannot (and 
should not) alleviate all anxiety but can effectively reduce what Tillich called 
"neurotic" (p. 68) forms of anxiety that distract from awareness of deeper 
questions about the meaning of one's life.
Psychiatrist Irvin Yalom (1980) built on this existential tradition by suggest-
ing that the symptoms of anxiety are related to ultimate existential concerns 
such as death, freedom, isolation, and meaninglessness; and he argued that 
psychotherapy can offer relationships to support individuals as they coura-
geously grapple with these kinds of deep concerns and construct meaning 
in the midst of existential anxiety. From an existential perspective, human 
capacities for symbolic consciousness and awareness of biological finitude 
contribute to the psychological challenges and possibilities of reflecting on one's 
mortality and other sources of negation, which shapes the periodic collisions 
between existential issues and our culturally and religiously derived meaning 
frameworks (Sullivan, 2016). Depth perspectives on anxiety suggest trying 
to get "underneath" surface-level anxiety to understand existential concerns 
that are a natural part of human finitude.
Behaviorists in the field of psychology conflated anxiety with fear and 
suggested both have an identifiable cue (for a historical overview, see Barlow, 
2002), which served to highlight the ways specific patterns of anxiety are 
learned through experiences of conditioning and reinforcement. This behav-
ioral, and later cognitive behavioral, psychology tradition generally divorced 
Anxiety, Relational Trauma, and Suffering
 83
symptoms of anxiety from any spiritual or existential meaning tied to human 
finitude and led to the scientific development and testing of specific inter-
ventions to reduce symptoms of anxiety. We call this a 
surface view
 of anxiety 
because the sole focus is the surface manifestation of embodied symptoms 
that perpetuate self-defeating patterns of behavior rather than any deeper 
existential or symbolic significance to anxiety. This approach has led to the 
development of multiple effective therapeutic interventions that have helped 
many people suffering from symptoms of anxiety. In fact, mindful aware-
ness of embodied symptoms of anxiety is a key part of growth in capacities  
for self-regulating anxiety and other emotions (Barlow & Farchione, 2018; 
Boettscher, Sandage, Latin, & Barlow, 2019).
However, the personal meaning of a client's suffering and overall develop-
mental trajectory is typically left unaddressed in surface approaches to anxiety. 
This is acceptable to some clients, but it does invite questions in cases like that 
of Sofia (see Chapter 1, this volume), with clients who are struggling with 
the meaning of their lives and contending with existential threats of nihilism. 
It may also help explain why symptom reduction may be temporary for some 
clients when a more holistic sense of a meaningful life is not developed and 
existential concerns reemerge. Tillich and the existentialists would say that 
once neurotic anxieties lessen, ontological anxieties about the fragile structures 
of finitude (i.e., losses, disappointments, failures, etc.) will eventually intensify 
and pull for the construction of a meaning system that can sustain self-esteem 
and motivate the person even in the face of those deeper threats to the human 
ego (i.e., their "symbolic structures of meaning and value"; see Sullivan, 
2016, p. 47). Thus, we see a benefit in integrating clinical attention to both 
surface and depth perspectives on anxiety.
EXISTENTIAL FEELINGS
Ratcliffe (2008) offered a helpful distinction between emotional feelings and 
existential feelings in supporting the relevance of a depth perspective. The 
former relate to specific episodes and cues, as the behaviorists indicated, 
whereas existential feelings do not relate to anything specific but represent 
a background orientation or "how we find ourselves in the world" (p. 36). 
Ratcliffe explained:
The world as a whole can sometimes appear unfamiliar, unreal, distant or close. 
It can be something that one feels apart from or at one with. One can feel in 
control of one's overall situation or overwhelmed by it. One can feel like a 
participant in the world or like a detached, estranged observer staring at objects 
that do not feel quite "there." Such relationships structure all experience. (p. 37)
Stephan (2012) built on this framework to suggest existential feelings can 
relate to self, the social environment, and the world at large. For example, 
one might generally feel dead inside or quite vibrant and alive (self), welcomed 
or rejected (social environment), at home or as a stranger (larger world).  
84 
Relational Spirituality in Psychotherapy
It would be common for psychotherapists to view these dynamics as purely 
emotional or aspects of personality functioning; however, they connect to 
powerful existential themes and ultimate concerns related to our sense of 
dwelling and the security to engage in seeking (see Chapter 3). We return to 
these and other existential themes or 
predicaments
 below.
Existentialists have also used the term 
angst
 to reference these negative 
existential orientations that go beyond discrete feelings and specific anxieties 
and move into states of generalized insecurity or meaninglessness (Peteet, 
2010; Sullivan, 2016). Angst could involve depressive feelings that one's life 
goals are empty or one's basic worldview system is faulty, and could also be 
located in the embodied self as basically defective, unworthy, shameful, or 
alone. From an existential perspective, feelings of angst may shape or mutually 
constitute perceptions of reality but can also arise from an awareness of 
actual sources of human negation, including natural processes of finitude 
and death but also social and systemic pathologies such as discrimination, 
bigotry, and exclusion. The dominant rationalistic framework in Western 
psychology tends to pathologize symptoms of angst as cognitive distortions, 
whereas our RSM starts with respecting the existential functions of anxiety, 
and we tend to assume angst is typically a reflection of genuine existential 
threat. This makes further sense when we also consider the relational functions 
of anxiety.
RELATIONAL FUNCTIONS OF ANXIETY
In addition to existential functions, anxiety can also serve relational func-
tions. Systems theorists (e.g., Kerr & Bowen, 1988) and attachment theorists 
(e.g., Wallin, 2007) have argued that a key function of anxiety is to regulate 
the balancing of closeness and distance in relationships. Individual differences 
in personality influence how this plays out. When anxious, some people dis-
tance from others through emotional cutoff by ignoring and/or not thinking 
or caring about others. In contrast, some people cling to others through 
emotional fusion or enmeshment by trying to maintain constant closeness or 
sameness. Others oscillate between these relational strategies.
As interpersonal boundaries become porous or diffuse, anxiety can also 
become contagious or "an increasingly infectious agent" (Kerr & Bowen, 1988, 
p. 77) in relational systems. Tillich (1952) noted this relational dynamic, 
observing that "outbreaks of anxiety are always contagious" (p. 92). Some 
families, religious communities, or social organizations suffer from chronic 
anxiety--an ongoing anticipatory fear of what might happen next. While 
situational anxiety can be adaptive for dealing with certain stressors or threats 
and facing important issues, chronic anxiety is nonadaptive and typically 
involves a lack of flexibility in how a system copes with challenges. The 
anxiety-driven "immunity to change" in some systems (Kegan & Lahey, 2009, 
p. 37) results in a resistance to new information from outside the system that 
Anxiety, Relational Trauma, and Suffering
 85
might interrupt maladaptive patterns of response and foster positive growth. 
Chronic anxiety in relational systems can also generate circular homeostatic 
loops that maintain stances of vigilance against perceived threats while inter-
preting feedback in ways that reinforce or even intensify anxiety.
Thus, in the RSM, we view anxiety as a dialectical phenomenon that is 
both stressful and potentially constructive. Much anxiety is unconscious 
and occurs at the cellular level to mobilize valuable immune functioning  
to protect against threats and maintain the stability of an organism or system 
(Kegan & Lahey, 2009; Kerr & Bowen, 1988). Overwhelming anxiety can 
lead to trauma (discussed below) and prove damaging to human well-being, 
whereas an optimal level of anxiety may be activating and contribute energy 
for facing important issues, conflicts, or facets of nonintegration and non-
being (Tillich, 1952). If handled with a healthy balance of self-confrontation 
and emotional regulation in a supportive relational context, certain levels of 
anxiety can arouse or catalyze growth, creativity, and spiritual transformation 
(Sandage, Jensen, & Jass, 2008).
Given the possible constructive role of anxiety for relational spirituality 
and meaning-making, it will be helpful to examine the influence of anxiety 
on individual differences in relational dynamics during stress and transitions. 
When thinking about the dynamics of relational spirituality within a relational 
system (e.g., a couple, family, religious congregation, mental health clinic),  
it is useful to attend to the overall level of anxiety in the system and whether 
the system has been able to navigate successfully other recent change involving 
new perspectives. Some systems with high levels of anxiety will have rigid 
boundaries and be impermeable to new inputs, while other systems might be 
overly porous to a cacophony of new inputs and show limited capacities for 
integrative coherence.
As we have suggested at multiple points in this book, various forms of 
relational spirituality can serve to help defend against, buffer, or metabolize 
anxiety and suffering, but certain forms of relational spirituality can also 
become sources of anxiety and suffering. Our RSM posits that humans have 
needs for both dwelling and seeking, and that because these needs are com-
plex, they must be integrated over time. When individuals struggle to develop 
healthy forms of dwelling and seeking, there are risks for disorientation 
(dwelling problem) and despair (seeking problem). Nietzsche (1887/1964; see 
also Reginster, 2009; Sullivan, 2016) said that nihilism or the severe absence of 
meaningful goal pursuit can result from the loss of either orienting values  
(disorientation) or of the belief in our own capacities to achieve those goals 
(despair). Mild levels of disorientation anxiety through the negation of our 
orienting beliefs, values, and worldview is a challenge to spiritual dwelling and 
may prompt attempts to recover our beliefs and/or connect with sources of 
orienting community. Moderate to severe disorientation anxiety may prompt 
either seeking behaviors, which may potentiate a spiritual transformation 
(Chapter 3), or some form of marginality, helplessness, or acting out that 
reflects existential feelings of nihilism and meaninglessness.
86 
Relational Spirituality in Psychotherapy
Despair anxiety is related to a loss of confidence in the self or the capacity 
to achieve one's goals. Rather than trying to return to sources of orienting 
community outside the self, despair anxiety can often promote the self- 
reflexivity and interiority of seeking in an attempt to understand these 
struggles and/or despondency toward larger social forces that do not seem to 
validate and support the person's goal quest (Sullivan, 2016). At manageable 
levels, despair anxiety may activate further spiritual-existential-religious-
theological (SERT) exploration and efforts to transform societal structures, 
religious communities, and the like. But at extreme levels, despair anxiety 
generates feelings of meaninglessness and hopelessness, which could lead to 
self-harm or suicidality.
ASSESSMENT AND CLINICAL ENGAGEMENT OF ANXIETY
For the theoretical reasons outlined here, we view anxiety as a core human 
dynamic related to finitude and suffering that we want to assess and clinically 
engage in all cases. This starts by introducing the language of "anxiety" to 
clients and taking the dialectical stance of both normalizing realities of anxiety 
while remaining empathic to the distress anxiety can generate. We want to 
help clients become self-aware of how anxiety manifests for them as somatic, 
psychosocial, and ultimately existential and relational spirituality processes. 
Somatically, anxiety can be related to numerous physical symptoms, such as
* accelerated heart rate,
* accelerated breathing or shortness of breath,
* muscle tension in certain parts of the body,
* abdominal or digestive distress,
* physical shaking,
* numbness or sleepiness,
* choking sensations or difficulty swallowing,
* feeling dizzy or light-headed, and
* sweating.
It is important to help clients mindfully inhabit (or 
dwell
) within their 
bodies to understand and begin to regulate their own anxiety. We also want 
to help clients identify psychosocial or relational stressors that tend to trigger 
their anxiety and help them begin to track patterns of how they respond 
and attempt to cope with these anxieties. We give particular attention to  
relational stances, beliefs, and practices in their coping processes. In relational 
modalities of treatment (couple, family, or group therapies), it can be partic-
ularly useful to draw out (i.e., differentiate) points of similarity and difference 
in anxiety processes (i.e., how anxieties manifest, how each individual attempts 
to cope, and what anxiety means). For example, a married couple shows a 
chronic pattern within which one spouse becomes anxious when feeling 
controlled or crowded by their partner's desire for closeness and responds by 
Anxiety, Relational Trauma, and Suffering
 87
creating emotional and physical distance through work preoccupation. In 
complementary fashion, the other spouse becomes anxious in the face of her 
partner's emotional and physical distancing (perceived as abandonment) and 
responds with intensifying demands for more closeness, further escalating the 
anxiety and reactivity in the couple system.
This assessment of anxiety and related patterns can often present an oppor-
tunity to explore where clients may have learned these coping strategies, 
which probably proved adaptive in family of origin and other past situations 
but may not fit their current life contexts. Again, we want to take the dialectic 
stance of communicating respect for survival strategies clients have learned to 
make it through prior episodes of suffering while also inviting flexibility and 
openness to considering new relational strategies.
Embodied and relational themes of anxiety can often lead to understanding 
a client's implicit existential and relational spirituality dynamics. We discuss 
many clinically powerful existential and relational spirituality themes below, 
but a key point here is to recognize that many clients have not previously been 
able to consistently mentalize or reflect on their anxieties in their prior relation-
ships. Thus, key relationships that might provide the safety and strength to hold 
clients during crucible processes related to existential and spiritual dilemmas 
(see Chapter 3) have not been able to do so. This often has the effect of freez-
ing the processes of meaning-making and relational spiritual development. 
And, this is also why our RSM suggests it is particularly important to assess 
how clients have handled or avoided transitions in life where processes of 
meaning-making and relational growth can be particularly stressful (e.g., birth 
or adoption of a child, leaving home, moving to a new place, marriage, divorce, 
death of a family member, loss of a job, retirement), since existential difficulties 
like this can become highly influential on internal working models of relation-
ships, including relational spirituality.
DYNAMICS OF TRAUMA
When individuals and relational systems experience overwhelming levels 
of anxiety, it is traumatic. The 
DSM-5
 orientation toward trauma focuses on 
traumatic stressors or events, and a traumatic stressor is defined as "any event 
(or events) that may cause or threaten death, serious injury, or sexual violence 
to an individual, a close family member, or a close friend" (American Psychi-
atric Association, 2013, p. 830). The anxiety related to traumatic experiences 
can overpower a person's capacity to cope and to integrate such experiences 
into a coherent set of memories and narratives (Levine, 2008). Trauma expert 
Bessel van der Kolk (2014) put it succinctly: "Trauma, by definition, is unbear-
able and intolerable" (p. 1). Trauma has also been described symbolically and 
existentially as a timeless "black hole" (Pitman & Orr, 1990, p. 469) that has 
a psychic gravitational pull "within which the light of awareness, of peace, 
and of wholeness is absorbed" (Bloom, 2010, p. 210; see also van der Kolk & 
McFarlane, 2007).
88 
Relational Spirituality in Psychotherapy
The effects of trauma can include a range of conflicting symptoms, such as
* intrusive thoughts and memories,
* numbing or dissociation,
* constriction of affect and experience,
* inability to regulate affect and arousal,
* hypervigilance,
* problems with concentration,
* self-destructive behavior,
* feelings of detachment or estrangement from others,
* nightmares and sleep disturbance,
* chronic anger,
* feelings of helplessness,
* chronic pain,
* avoidance of symbolic reminders of trauma, and
* compulsion to reexperience aspects of the traumatic event.
Herman (2015) noted "the dialectic of trauma" (p. 2), which is represented in 
the various contrasting themes and symptoms related to intrusion and con-
striction, and hypervigilance and dissociation, as a person unconsciously tries 
to balance these opposing psychic forces in the absence of the integrative 
dynamics involved in healing. Trauma often instills a deep sense of shame or 
humiliation over the extreme helplessness and self-disappointment a trauma-
tized person can experience during (or after) dis-integrating and overwhelming 
experiences that transcend their coping resources.
The language of "trauma" has become ubiquitous and expansive in both 
public and clinical discourse to a point that the crushing nature of traumatic 
experience can sometimes be trivialized. One of our clients, a survivor of a 
gang rape, was deeply offended by the title of Mark Epstein's (2013) book, 
The Trauma of Everyday Life
, saying of the author, "He must not understand 
real
trauma!" Traumatic symptoms that become clinically impairing of functioning 
for more than one month may represent posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD; 
American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Actual experiences of clinical-level 
trauma may be more prevalent than is often recognized by laypersons, yet it 
is also important for clinicians to exercise clinical discipline in use of the 
language of trauma. It is worth noting that experiences of trauma for some 
individuals, families, and groups can become chronic, particularly in the context 
of systemic oppression (Tummala-Narra, 2016), so the symptoms of trauma 
may become less tied to events and more a part of daily life. For all these rea-
sons, it can be challenging to find the most meaningful and accurate ways to 
use the language of trauma and to differentiate types and levels of intensity 
or chronicity.
Herman (2015) proposed a more severe diagnostic category of complex 
PTSD (C-PTSD), which can result from chronic or repeated traumatic experi-
ences of abuse, neglect, exploitation, violence, entrapment, and other forms 
of repeated victimization. It is noteworthy that Herman's definition of C-PTSD 
Anxiety, Relational Trauma, and Suffering
 89
has a decidedly relational orientation in that trauma is understood as most 
frequently experienced through relationships. C-PTSD is not yet an official 
diagnostic category in the 
DSM
 system. However, the World Health Orga-
nization Working Group on the Classification of Stress-Related Disorders 
has proposed including C-PTSD as a diagnostic category distinct from PTSD 
(Maercker & Perkonigg, 2013), and empirical evidence is accumulating to sup-
port that distinction (Cloitre, Garvert, Weiss, Carlson, & Bryant, 2014). C-PTSD 
is characterized by symptoms of PTSD but also more severe self-identity dis-
turbance, relational impairment, and "loss of sustaining faith" or a "sense of 
hopelessness and despair" (Herman, 2015, p. 121), which speaks to our interests 
in the existential and spiritual dynamics of trauma. Research comparing C-PTSD 
and PTSD client profiles has found a longer duration of trauma exposure and 
higher levels of consistently negative self-identity (i.e., high levels of worthless-
ness and guilt), relational avoidance, reactive anger, feelings of emptiness, and 
overall impairment in the former.
Van der Kolk (2005, 2014) proposed the diagnostic category of 
Develop-
mental Trauma Disorder
 to relate the idea of C-PTSD to the developmental 
impact of trauma on children, which impairs key aspects of healthy develop-
ment such as affect regulation, interpersonal trust and collaboration, forming 
and executing plans and goals, and delaying gratification. He also briefly ref-
erenced the existential impact and notes these children "develop a view of the 
world that incorporates their betrayal and hurt. They expect the trauma to 
recur" (van der Kolk, 2005, pp. 406-407). He suggested they often have frozen 
reactions to the process of meaning-making and, in addition to help with 
affect regulation, these individuals need help "to re-awaken their curiosity 
and to explore their surroundings" (p. 408). In the language of the RSM, van 
der Kolk described the impact of developmental trauma on impaired dwelling 
and
 seeking.
Trauma Matrix
The perspectives above lead us to two key summary points in our RSM 
approach to psychotherapy. First, trauma is always existential. In addition to 
the physical and psychosocial aspects, trauma is always an existential process 
of responding to the ontological anxieties inherent in threats to existence, 
selfhood, and relational and spiritual security within the "trauma matrix" 
(Yansen, 2016, p. 70), a concept that refers to worldview assumptions used  
to filter experiences of trauma and existential threat (Sullivan, 2016). Janoff- 
Bulman (2002) suggested the core of human assumptive worlds include 
beliefs about self, the external world, and the relations between the two, and 
common pre-trauma assumptions often include "'the world is benevolent,' 
'the world is meaningful,' and 'the self is worthy'" (p. 6). These assumptions 
are frequently shattered by trauma (at least temporarily).
Trauma can also arrest hope and freeze meaning-making, as noted by 
Levi and colleagues (2012): "When you undergo a trauma, you fall apart. . . . 
90 
Relational Spirituality in Psychotherapy
It's the feeling that your hope has been arrested. . . . That you're stuck and 
can't build on it" (Levi, Liechtentritt, & Savaya, p. 1158). Traumatic experience 
can often dis-integrate the person or pull apart coherent meaning, identity, 
and holistic functioning. Trauma has been described as "an assault to the self" 
(Kerig & Becker, 2010, p. 24), and numerous theorists have noted the need to 
help clients deal with the existential and meaning-making aspects of trauma 
that can penetrate the core of personhood, identity, and basic beliefs about 
security in the world (Park, Currier, Harris, & Slattery, 2017; Rambo, 2010; 
Schnyder et al., 2015; van der Kolk & McFarlane, 2007). Nevertheless, the 
existential aspects of trauma generally receive very limited attention in clinical 
treatment literatures.
Second, the concept of a trauma matrix highlights the importance of 
diverse cultural, existential, spiritual, and communal meanings and coping 
processes related to trauma, anxiety, and suffering in differing social contexts. 
Yansen (2016) explained:
Trauma is a process; it is created--shaped in the intersection of the extreme 
events, the individual/group realities, and the social contexts in which trauma 
arises--the 
trauma matrix.
 . . . As a consequence, different individuals and 
collectivities work through trauma in very different ways. (p. 70)
Reductionist clinical approaches to trauma tend to reduce trauma to the 
biological and psychological "levels." In contrast, the concept of a trauma 
matrix suggests the need for clinicians to seek to understand the interrelated 
dynamics of culture, religiosity, community, and other worldview systems of 
meaning involved in clients' experiences of coping with suffering and trauma. 
In describing collective trauma, Saul (2014) also pointed to the important 
differences in communal and institutional patterns and resources related to 
collective responses to trauma, which can impact suffering and resilience for 
generations. Chronic systemic problems such as poverty, racism, and other 
forms of oppression are often chronic traumatic stressors that can serve  
to perpetuate communal difficulties in trauma responses that go well beyond 
individual functioning.
Relational Trauma
The trauma matrix brings together collective, sociocultural dynamics of 
relationality and meaning-making in the process of suffering, yet interpersonal 
dynamics are also influential in trauma (Park et al., 2017). We have just refer-
enced the existential dynamics of trauma, and our relational framework also 
leads us to focus on relational development dynamics associated with trauma 
or what is sometimes called 
relational trauma
. While much discourse about 
trauma focuses on extreme trauma events or the chronicity of trauma, we are 
here referencing the relational dynamics that emerge and become ratified 
within the trauma matrix. Herman (2015) defined relational trauma as 
"violations of human connection" (p. 54), which can arise developmentally 
in relationships where a child or adult encounters dysregulating patterns 
Anxiety, Relational Trauma, and Suffering
 91
that violate the safety and support of secure and trustworthy relationships 
(attachment), the healthy intimacy of being known and recognized (inter-
subjectivity), and warm curiosity and respect for differences in perspectives, 
values, and decisions (differentiation). Parts of the self may be ignored, attacked, 
or humiliated, and these can be experienced as threats to the existence of 
these self-states. Contingencies about vulnerability are communicated through 
interpersonal dynamics, such as an implicit rule in some family systems like 
"help will only be given if I admit I am defective" or "receiving support requires 
that I completely submit to your superior knowledge and value system." Some 
learn the only pathway to help is through personal agency, so a "solo survivor" 
script develops that jettisons turning to others for assistance.
Bromberg (2011), a leading theorist of the relational trauma perspective, 
suggested that "we look at trauma not as a special situation but as a continuum 
that commands our attention only when it disrupts or threatens to disrupt the 
continuity of self-experience" (p. 13). Developmental or relational trauma 
exists on a continuum (DeYoung, 2015) and is not to be equated with PTSD 
but frequently generates PTSD-level symptomatology. Two key clinical assess-
ment questions about relational trauma are: (a) During times of powerful 
emotional and existential dysregulation in life, to what degree has the person 
experienced the healthy and responsive relational dynamics that cultivate 
mindfulness and mentalization? and, (b) When those relational resources have 
not been available, what relational strategies has the person learned to use for 
psychological, existential, spiritual, and physical survival? Bromberg went on 
to explain the developmental process of relational trauma this way:
A person's core self--the self that is shaped by early attachment patterns-- 
is defined by who the parental objects perceive him [sic] to be and deny him  
to be. That is, through relating to their child as though he is "such and such" and 
ignoring other aspects of him as if they don't exist, the parents "disconfirm" the 
relational existence of those aspects of the child's self that they perceptually 
dissociate. This makes the disconfirmed aspects of the child's self relationally 
nonnegotiable because the subjective experiences that organize those self-states 
can't be shared and compared communicatively, with how they appear in another 
mind. The main point is that "disconfirmation," because it is relationally non-
negotiable, is traumatic by definition and I believe accounts for much of what 
we call developmental trauma, or as it's sometimes named, "relational trauma." 
(p. 57)
Bromberg's emphasis on the impact of the disconfirmation of relational 
existence on a developing sense of selfhood has profound implications for the 
developmental systems that impact relational spirituality and capacities for 
meaning-making. Schore (2018), another leading theorist of relational 
trauma, has emphasized the role of early attachment dynamics with parents 
and caregivers in developing capacities for affect regulation and right-brain 
symbolic processing of experience. Disorganized attachment experiences of 
abuse and neglect serve to cultivate relational trauma that is "affectively burnt 
in" (Schore, 2018, p. 245) to the developing right brain and shapes implicit 
relational expectations about dynamics like conflict, basic safety, repair, trust 
92 
Relational Spirituality in Psychotherapy
of others, and one's own "lovability." Relational trauma sets up a vicious loop 
of interpersonal neurobiology--the person does not feel secure in the world or 
in their connections to others, and their own relational style might contribute 
to a range of vulnerabilities to further suffering and trauma while also making 
it difficult for the person to take in new and more constructive relational 
experiences. The circular dynamics of relational trauma have powerful impli-
cations for existential and spiritual development and bring us back to the 
need to understand existential levels of anxiety and suffering (Rambo, 2010).
EXISTENTIAL THEMES OF ANXIETY AND SUFFERING
As suggested in the existential perspectives above, symptoms of anxiety emerge 
not just from surface-level fears but also deeper sources of existential threat 
related to death and finitude. As humans, we generally seek to maintain exis-
tential security primarily through meaning-making, relational attachments, 
and self-esteem (Sullivan, 2016), but these security systems for existential 
anxiety management will periodically break down in what Jaspers (1970) called 
limit situations
. These are situations of existential dysregulation that rupture 
our taken-for-granted assumptions about our security, our worth, and our 
connection to the world (Loder, 1989). Awareness of death is the ultimate limit 
situation and challenges multiple forms of existential security about nonbeing 
(Tillich, 1952). We could say that death is the ultimate narcissistic injury or 
threat to self-esteem (Becker, 1973). Experimental studies of death anxiety in 
the field of terror management theory have shown that priming awareness of 
death can intensify a person's psychological investment in their cultural or 
religious beliefs and activate attempts to reinforce self-esteem, as Becker 
predicted, and these effects are sometimes delayed (Burke, Martens, & Faucher, 
2010). In other words, experiences that prompt death awareness make 
mortality salient, and this can prompt psychological efforts to buffer existen-
tial anxiety by trying to reaffirm belief systems or self-esteem over the coming 
weeks and months. In some cases, particularly following trauma, those efforts 
may not work because of shattered assumptions or shame about the self, 
shame about key relationships, or even shame about one's larger community 
or social environment. From a terror management theory framework, psycho-
pathology is thought to result, in part, from difficulties effectively buffering 
and managing the impact of existential anxieties.
Existential philosophy came to prominence in Western Europe following 
the trauma of World War II and strongly emphasized individualistic cultural 
themes, which is a limitation within much of the classic existential literature. 
Following Sullivan (2016), we prefer an intercultural perspective on exis-
tential themes that values attention to cultural differences, including more 
collectivistic forms of existential process (considered below). Theorists of 
Black existentialism, such as Fanon (1963, 1967), offer valuable contrasting 
insights to White existentialist authors for understanding the impact of 
Anxiety, Relational Trauma, and Suffering
 93
racialized violence, colonization, and oppression in the complicated dynamics 
of human liberation and empowerment necessary for meaning and identity 
re
-construction (Vereen, Wines, Lemberger-Truelove, Hannon, Howard, & Burt, 
2017). Vereen et al. (2017) noted that Fanon emphasized the problem of 
existential deviation for Blacks where "all recognized notions of language, 
culture, and identity are imposed by the dominant culture" (p. 76) and that 
Black experience is too often "overdetermined from without" (Fanon, 1967, 
p. 116). Whereas individualistic forms of existentialism focus on individual 
suffering and flourishing, Black existentialists invite more social and communal 
understandings of both suffering and flourishing along with systemic decon-
struction of barriers to enacting freedom. Thus, existential questioning is not 
only about individual subjective interiority but requires an awareness of 
intersubjective aspects of social and cultural identity (powell, 2012).
Existential themes are ubiquitous in the struggles described by psycho-
therapy clients. Table 4.1 depicts some taxonomies of existential themes or pre-
dicaments highlighted by existential theorists Paul Tillich (1952), Victor Frankl 
(1959), Irvin Yalom (1980), and Robert Neville (2014). A quick review of these 
themes shows points of convergence with Exline and colleagues' categories of 
spiritual and religious struggles reviewed in Chapter 3 (e.g., struggles with moral-
ity, meaning, the divine, interpersonal relations, and doubt), and with our 
research finding that spiritual and religious struggles predicted clients' psycho-
social functioning over and above their mental health symptoms. This finding 
offers some support for the general thesis of existential theorists that certain 
ontological anxieties and ultimate concerns can often be latent or "depth" dynam-
ics that influence psychological symptoms and functioning (and vice versa).
Tillich's (1952) existential taxonomy has also received empirical support in 
the research of Carl Weems (Weems, Costa, Dehon, & Berman, 2004), who 
validated a measure of existential anxiety based on Tillich's (1952) three 
dimensions of absolute concern (death, meaninglessness, condemnation) 
and their cor responding relative concerns (fate, emptiness, guilt). Weems and 
colleagues have found these existential concerns are so prevalent even among 
non clinical adolescent and adult samples that they can be considered a "norma-
tive phenomenon" (p. 395) but are also correlated with struggles in identity 
development (S. L. Berman, Weems, & Stickle, 2006). Existential anxieties have 
also been found to be more salient following trauma and to be positively associ-
ated with PTSD symptoms (Chung, Chung, & Easthope, 2000; Pyszczynski, 
TABLE 4.1.
 Existential Taxonomies
Tillich 
Concerns
Frankl 
Yalom 
Neville
Absolute
Relative
Existential Themes
Death
Fate
Suffering
Death
Guilt
Meaninglessness
Emptiness
Guilt
Freedom
Disintegration
Condemnation
Guilt
Death
Isolation
Estrangement
Meaninglessness
Destruction
94 
Relational Spirituality in Psychotherapy
Greenberg, & Solomon, 1999; Scott & Weems, 2013; Weems, Russell, Neill, 
Berman, & Scott, 2016).
How Existential Themes Can Emerge During Therapy
We suggest that existential themes often emerge in the process of psycho-
therapy, although it can be easy to miss the existential dynamics of certain 
client struggles. For example, a client in couple therapy shows a recurrent 
pattern of dysregulation during certain interactions with her partner, typically 
following situations in which her partner is very late getting home without 
any communication (i.e., not responding to calls or texts). At a surface level, 
there are symptoms of physical and psychological anxiety and anger. Psycho-
logically, this pattern could also be linked to the client's preoccupied attach-
ment style and her fears of abandonment. But further mindful exploration by 
the therapist in collaboration with the client ("What else do you notice comes 
up for you in that situation?") eventually led the client to this awareness: 
"I guess I start to ask, 'What's the point!' What's the point!'" As the client 
recounted this, she was crying but also voicing anxious desperation or angst 
that seemed much deeper than the situation at hand. With further exploration, 
the client and therapist came to realize it reflected a kind of wrestling with 
despair about being connected to people one cannot control and could lose at 
any time. It was not total despair because the client was still subconsciously 
asking the question, albeit partially as a form of protest, in those situations. 
While anxiety-provoking and painful to tolerate, this client was voicing a 
profound and important existential question that has riddled humans for 
millennia--namely the meaningfulness of loving others given the unavoidable 
risks of loss.
Another client describes confusion, insecurity, and reactivity to coworkers 
in a new workplace. After unpacking the related feelings, thoughts, and 
embodied sensations, the client declares, "I don't know if I have a right to 
exist there." This existential feeling of angst is more general than the particular 
emotions or automatic thoughts and reflects a question about the nexus of 
justice, self-worth, and existence. As the only person of color in that particular 
area of the organization, there was a racial basis for the client's existential 
anxiety tied to larger systemic dynamics of racism in U.S. society and the 
client's prior personal experience of exclusion by Whites which Fanon (1967) 
called "existential deviation" (p. xviii). Importantly, further exploration revealed 
the client was implicitly asking the question of whether his coworkers thought 
he had a right to exist there, but he had also internalized racism in ways that 
caused him to be unsure about his own right to exist in certain social spaces. 
The fact that he was now conscious of and troubled by this existential ques-
tion was a sign of developmental growth, yet he was confused about how to 
work with this question and new to the process of relating with others around 
this form of seeking. While the therapist was tempted to provide immediate 
reassurance of self-worth to the client, it became evident to both that the 
Anxiety, Relational Trauma, and Suffering
 95
existential questions ran deeper, and the systemic realities were broader than 
could be quickly resolved through a single therapeutic statement.
Existential perspectives also tend to highlight "the dialectical nature of 
human psychological processes" (Sullivan, 2016, p. 8), which fits our dialectical 
emphasis within the RSM. For example, clinical and developmental theorists 
have described versions of the "twin terrors" in intimate human relationships--
abandonment and engulfment--or the fear of losing a loved object and the fear 
of losing one's self through merger with another (see Alperin, 2001). Numerous 
existential theorists have pointed to a ubiquitous existential dialectic of anxiety 
and guilt or "uncertainty versus inadequacy" (Sullivan, 2016), and this can be 
related to the relational spirituality dilemmas of dwelling and seeking. When 
individuals maintain stable patterns of spiritual and interpersonal dwelling in 
communal bonds, there is a risk of periodically struggling with guilt over fail-
ures in obligations or possibly a nagging sense of not taking fresh risks to 
develop the self. As suggested in Chapter 3, when individuals do engage in 
seeking and take risks of prioritizing personal development or new experiences 
there will often be a rise in anxiety due to the ambiguity and uncertainty in 
the process. The existential theme of control is also typically in play in this 
dialectic, as guilt is tied to feeling one should have been able to control certain 
actions, whereas anxiety often comes from uncertainty about control in life. 
Shame is another related moral emotion that goes beyond distress about 
certain actions (guilt) and involves feelings of worthlessness about the self 
and failures to live up to one's ideals.
As a clinical example of these existential themes in tension, a conservative 
Christian client described this set of existential dilemmas as he came to realize 
he had lived his whole life in both shame and guilt based on the conflicts 
between his sexuality and the theology of his religious community. As he 
began to differentiate his own theological understanding in ways that differed 
from his family and church, he felt some reduction in guilt but an increase in 
anxiety, explaining, "What if it doesn't work out? What if I don't find anyone 
to love? Who is going to be my support?" Note the anxiety in seeking that 
comes prior to new forms of dwelling. As this client engaged in new forms of 
relationship and meaning construction, he also traded one form of shame for 
another--shame for being gay shifted to shame for overstaying in the closet 
for so long. This reflects a powerful human tendency to hold on to a sense of 
personal control even if it means painful feelings of inadequacy, because it 
maintains an illusion of dwelling with an ego ideal. The anxiety-provoking 
alternative involves the reduced control of grieving and moving toward humble 
acceptance of the limits and existential riskiness involved in human develop-
ment and decision-making.
We have only touched upon a subset of the rich array of existential "big 
picture" themes that interact with the microrelational dynamics that unfold in 
therapy. Orange (2011) described the therapy dialectic of attending to develop-
mental work at "the local level" and with "big picture" themes (pp. 192-201). 
By local level, she had in mind the moment-by-moment, in-session, and 
96 
Relational Spirituality in Psychotherapy
intersubjective dynamics between therapists and clients involving the sloppy 
processes of connection, rupture, and repair that have been highlighted, for 
example, in the work of the Boston Change group and Jeremy Safran. In 
referencing the "big developmental picture," Orange meant keeping in mind 
larger developmental themes and processes that are often beneath or inter-
twined with these momentary points of relational process in deeply meaning-
ful ways. Orange cited the clinical sensibilities of Kohut and Winnicott as 
theorists who focused on the "forest over the trees" (p. 201) or the larger 
gestalt of a person's development. We agree with Orange's argument for the 
importance of attention to both local-level and big picture dynamics in 
psychotherapy.
In Table 4.2, we offer a heuristic list of big picture existential themes or 
existential predicaments that are related to primal fears and may be involved 
in developmental transitions or episodes of developmental "stuck-ness." As a 
heuristic, we recognize the list is not comprehensive and the connections 
between specific existential predicaments and primal fears can be contested 
and should not be held tightly. It would also be a mistake to impose these 
themes on a given client in a way that was not responsive to their own local 
level subjectivity and meaning-making process. Yet these are widely recurring 
existential themes related to predicaments within human experiences of suf-
fering and trauma, and we have found them to offer clinically useful thematic 
reference points within therapy dialogue. Clients will seek to negotiate or 
contend with these predicaments in differing ways, depending upon their 
worldview frameworks and particular beliefs about suffering (discussed later). 
But we find it helpful to be familiar with a multifaceted set of existential 
themes, in part to avoid a more limited existential focus that can be found in 
certain models of psychotherapy. We return to these themes in the clinical 
chapters to follow.
TABLE 4.2.
 Relational Spirituality Model (RSM) Heuristic of Existential 
Predicaments and Primal Fears
Existential predicament
Primal fear
Death
Annihilation or disintegration
Isolation or loneliness
Abandonment
Freedom or choice
Ambiguity or anomie
Meaninglessness
Absurdity or emptiness
Injustice
Oppression
Guilt
Condemnation
Estrangement
Shame or hatred
Control
Powerlessness
Intimacy
Engulfment
Tragedy
Unpredictability
Alterity or abjection
Exclusion
Achievement
Failure or destruction
Invisibility
Lack of intersubjectivity or human recognition
Defilement
Contamination
Anxiety, Relational Trauma, and Suffering
 97
Suffering Narratives and Theories of Illness Causation
Entering into a client's trauma matrix involves seeking to understand their 
underlying beliefs about suffering, which are often tied to cultural and SERT 
belief systems that take a narrative structure we liken to Kleinman's (1988) 
concept of illness narratives (see Chapter 1, this volume). Awareness of these 
differing suffering narratives is a key part of cultural, existential, and spiritual 
or religious diversity competence and respect for clients' values and perspec-
tives. At many points in history, and presently in many parts of the world, 
humans have tended to assume (a) life universally involves suffering, and  
(b) supernatural forces or other ultimate realities cause suffering, most  
frequently due to human immorality or excessive attachment to illusions. 
However, in contemporary postindustrial and pluralistic contexts where 
humans have greater degrees of technological control over pain and suffering 
and greater exposure to worldview diversity, suffering increasingly tends to 
be viewed as a problem that invites existential awareness of finitude and spir-
itual and/or existential questions about ultimate realities and the meaning of 
life and death (Geniusas, 2013; Wildman, 2018).
Some approaches to psychotherapy actually recommend 
not
 giving atten-
tion to beliefs about the causes of suffering, which are viewed as a distraction 
that risks self-blame, and such psychotherapies focus solely and pragmatically 
on solutions to symptoms of surface-level anxiety and suffering. However, 
such approaches convey cultural and SERT insensitivity and may perpetuate 
colonizing approaches to treatment. A lack of any meaningful belief system 
related to suffering risks nihilism (Sullivan, 2016), so therapeutic approaches 
will likely impose an implicit set of beliefs about the meaning of suffering  
if not foster intentional sensitivity for relating effectively to client diversity.  
A well-paced process of seeking to respectfully understand clients' particular 
beliefs about suffering, should clients be open to this, can also deepen the 
therapy relationship in ways that often facilitate healing and meaning-making. 
For these reasons, it is important for clinicians to familiarize themselves with 
how different worldviews interpret suffering and suggest mechanisms for heal-
ing, thus providing therapists with some differentiated background knowl-
edge for engaging clients in this domain. There are many ways to approach 
developing a more differentiated stance, but we will offer a couple of frame-
works we have found helpful.
George Murdock's (1980) global survey of illness causation theories offers 
a useful heuristic that continues to inform contemporary public health research 
and the field of ethnomedicine (Erickson, 2008). His work fits with Kleinman's 
(1988) illness narratives perspective and attention to the interpretive world-
view frameworks that shape understandings of suffering. Murdock started by 
noting several theories of natural illness causation, such as infection, stress, 
organic deterioration, accident, and overt human aggression. These natural or 
biopsychosocial theories tend to be dominant assumptive frameworks within 
Western mental health care and models of psychotherapy based on a bio-
medical disease model and, notably, do not necessarily require existential and 
98 
Relational Spirituality in Psychotherapy
spiritual considerations. In other words, many Western psychotherapists 
probably implicitly or explicitly assume natural illness-causation theories and 
minimize or negate other worldviews. But Murdock's cross-cultural research 
found supernatural illness-causation theories were much more frequent across 
the globe than were natural theories, and it is important to note that throughout 
history and around the globe the majority of people have attributed illness 
and suffering to supernatural forces that control human life and the cosmos. 
Murdock grouped the supernatural theories of illness causation into three 
categories: mystical, animistic, and magical (see Table 4.3).
Theories of mystical causation
 assume illness is due to impersonal spiritual 
forces, such as fate (e.g., bad luck, astrological influence), ominous sensations 
(e.g., potent dreams, sights, sounds, smells), contagion (e.g., contact with a 
polluting substance or person), or mystical retribution or karma (e.g., violation 
of a taboo or moral injunction). It is worth noting that the theme of fate is 
a concern in existential theories (Tillich, 1952) and also a prominent causal 
mechanism in the suffering narratives of certain worldviews. For example, 
some collectivistic cultures view illness and suffering as a fate resulting from 
personal immorality, and this view of suffering serves to socially control  
or repress deviance in contexts that require high degrees of social inter-
dependence. Yang and colleagues found this "repressive suffering construal" 
(Yang, Liu, Sullivan, & Pan, 2016, p. 67) was more common in rural and 
lower-SES environments characterized by large family size. In such collec-
tivistic settings, there is often a cultural emphasis on spiritual dwelling and 
maintaining a moral order, so suffering is often interpreted through an exis-
tential lens focused on moral emotions of guilt and shame. This emphasis on 
fate or suffering that is morally "deserved" is quite different from the way 
individualistic cultures and western psychotherapists often frame suffering 
as related to uncertainty and trauma in a chaotic world (Sullivan, 2016).
Theories of animistic causation
 attribute illness or suffering to personalized 
spiritual entities, such as deities, spirits, souls, or ghosts. This can include soul 
loss or suffering attributed to the separation/exile of the soul from the body 
(Fadiman, 2012), or what Murdock (1980) grouped together as theories of 
spirit aggression (i.e., hostile or punitive action by a malevolent and offended 
supernatural being). Soul loss is particularly interesting for our considerations 
in this book because it is often thought to be generated by fear over traumatic 
events. Belief in spirits and ghosts may also be more common than typically 
recognized by mental health professionals, as psychology of religion research 
TABLE 4.3.
 Murdock's (1980) Supernatural Theories of Illness Causation
Theories of mystical 
causation
Theories of animistic 
causation
Theories of magical 
causation
Fate
Soul loss
Sorcery
Ominous sensations
Spirit aggression
Witchcraft
Contagion
Mystical retribution
Anxiety, Relational Trauma, and Suffering
 99
to date has tended to show a bias toward measures of God as a personal deity 
or more generalized themes of spirituality (Laird, Curtis, & Morgan, 2017).
Theories of magical causation
 ascribe illness to covert action by an envious, 
offended, or malicious human being. Sorcery is aggressive use of magical tech-
niques (e.g., spells, prayers, curses) by a layperson, and witchcraft involves 
the same by a group with special dark powers and trait levels of envy. Witches 
and shamans can both use spiritual powers to cause suffering and these spir-
itual figures are part of belief systems that integrate the human and spiritual 
realms. I (SJS) worked with a client who was praying that his wife's emo-
tional distress would increase so she might join him in couple therapy, and 
I was judgmental of this practice until I came to understand it fit within his 
worldview. In addition to Murdock's (1980) categories, many cultures view 
illness as resulting from various forms of body imbalance (e.g., humors, 
energies, hot-cold, emotions), and these imbalances are often understood as 
related to spiritual dynamics (Erickson, 2008).
Murdock (1980) found spirit aggression to be the most widespread illness 
theory and nearly universal, followed by sorcery (second most common) 
and mystical retribution for taboo violations (third most common). He found 
every society that depended primarily on animal-based agriculture for its 
economic resources considered spirit aggression a predominant or important 
secondary cause of illness. Murdock offered the intriguing "pastoral relation-
ship" theory that an emotional connection of "mutuality" (p. 85) with large 
animals and the need to protect them for communal survival might lead to 
projecting a similar relationship onto supernatural beings as potentially offer-
ing (and withdrawing) protection from danger. This idea fits with more recent 
cognitive science research on the evolution of religion suggesting that the 
historical development of settled agricultural societies required bigger and 
more complicated gods understood as personal beings (anthropomorphized 
agents) who regulated patterns in nature, structured morality in large social 
groups, and provided protection from enemies (Norenzayan, 2013; Wildman, 
2017). This understanding also has resonance with our limbic-based relational 
spirituality framework and the important role of relational dynamics (e.g., 
perceived aggression versus protection) in interpretations of spiritual experi-
ence. Across many regions of the world, illness is thought to involve some 
imbalance or disorganized relations between the individual and their social 
and/or spiritual environments.
In Western contexts, sorcery might be relatively uncommon as an explicit 
illness-causation theory, but perhaps shades of this theory are more common 
than recognized. For example, a client reported being haunted (at a level that 
sounded traumatic) by her father-in-law's statement some two decades earlier 
that his son (client's husband) would "prove to fail in life if he went ahead 
with the marriage." The client experienced this statement as similar to a pro-
phetic spiritual curse that was causally related to their subsequent marital 
problems and to the husband's ongoing difficulties maintaining consistent 
employment.
100 
Relational Spirituality in Psychotherapy
Theories of mystical retribution for taboo violations tap into the complicated 
dynamics of morality and guilt. Murdock (1980) noted the ways in which 
internalization of a community's moral standards can promote self-regulation, 
and how violations can potentially be dysregulating and, therefore, immune 
suppressing. Since spiritual and religious traditions are often associated with 
morality, it is common for violations of moral codes to promote anxiety about 
relational spirituality and the potential consequences of those violations.  
In some contexts, violations of a certain taboo in areas such as sexuality, 
gender, or forming relationships outside one's cultural or religious tradition 
might represent a threat to one's communal standing and can risk exclusion. 
In many different worldviews, healing involves seeking forgiveness from other 
humans or from deities and spirits through ritual practices of atonement, but 
this might not seem feasible for clients who have differentiated themselves in 
certain ways from their families and communities of origin.
Spiritual and Religious Beliefs About Suffering
Spiritual and religious traditions offer a plethora of different sets of beliefs about 
the causes and meanings of suffering that supplement Murdock's (1980) cate-
gories. Yet specific beliefs about suffering have received very little empirical 
research attention in the psychology of religion, which led to the develop-
ment of the Views of Suffering Scale (VOSS; Hale-Smith, Park, & Edmondson, 
2012; Park et al., 2017) that engages numerous theological and religious 
views not considered in Murdock's research. In theistic religious traditions 
that posit a personal God, 
theodicies
 are sets of beliefs that contend with the 
seeming discrepancies between God's goodness and the realities of evil and 
suffering in the world. More broadly, most philosophical and religious tradi-
tions suggest frameworks for understanding the problems of evil and suffering, 
while it is also important to recognize that some traditions (e.g., Buddhism) 
view suffering as inevitable and universal.
The VOSS offers another useful heuristic for considering differing spiritual 
and religious views of suffering and has received initial validation through 
confirmatory factor analysis with multiple samples resulting in nine subscales 
reflecting different beliefs about suffering, including theistic and nontheistic 
views (Hale-Smith et al., 2012; see Table 4.4). The research on the VOSS shows 
nine distinct factors, but the subscales can be correlated, which means indi-
viduals can hold a combination of these views of suffering.
A review of Table 4.4 summarizing VOSS dimensions suggests it is a useful 
assessment heuristic, but it differentiates several monotheistic views while 
offering limited engagement of other spiritual and religious worldviews. We 
cannot do a comprehensive survey of views of suffering, but we will offer a 
few points to supplement the heuristics offered by Murdock and the VOSS. 
First, there are different accounts of karma within the many traditions of 
Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, and the singular VOSS dimension of Retribution 
(Karma) does not do justice to these suffering narratives. Buddhist traditions, 
Anxiety, Relational Trauma, and Suffering
 101
for example, assert that suffering is universal and results from misperception 
and attachment to the illusory, which can be liberated through enlightenment. 
Karma is a universal self-regulating moral law of cause and effect, often based 
on relational treatment of others, which generates productive suffering within 
the quest toward ultimate spiritual goals. The VOSS scale label (Retribution) 
for karma also fails to convey broader aspects of this spiritual view (see 
Jennings, 2010).
 The VOSS measures an open theism view (which considers God to have 
limited knowledge and control over the future) and another grouping the 
authors call "unorthodox" (which views God as not completely benevolent), 
but this overlooks the varieties of process theism that have been particularly 
prominent in contemporary theology over the past century (Wildman, 2017). 
Versions of process theology typically view God as benevolent but also differ-
entiated from some aspects of ultimate reality that cause suffering. Many 
forms of process theism suggest the divine relationally suffers along with 
humanity, and these views often promote suffering narratives that emphasize 
human responsibility and social-justice activism to participate in the transfor-
mation of suffering. Liberation approaches to theology and spirituality often 
rest on these process assumptions and specify social structures of systemic evil 
and injustice (e.g., racism, sexism, homophobia, poverty, eco-pollution) as 
key sources of suffering over and above other sources of ontological suffering 
(see powell, 2012).
Finally, ground-of-being theism represents a set of views that may roughly 
correspond to what the VOSS authors have in mind for their "unorthodox" 
TABLE 4.4.
 Dimensions for Views of Suffering Scale (VOSS)
Subscale
Description
Random
There is no way to predict suffering and no underlying reason  
  for suffering.
Karma (authors use  
  term 
Retribution
)
Based on Buddhist and Hindu beliefs in suffering as part of  
  a cycle where prior individual deeds impact subsequent  
  experiences of suffering
Limited knowledge
Open theism beliefs of God's limited knowledge and control  
  over suffering
Suffering God
Jewish and Christian beliefs of God's compassionate presence  
  amid suffering, or God suffering with humanity
Providence
Belief that God controls suffering
Overcoming
Based on Pentecostal beliefs that one can overcome suffering  
  through prayer or faith
Soul-building
Belief that God always uses suffering as a challenge or personal  
  growth experience
Encounter/Divine  
  responsibility
Beliefs about suffering as a divine encounter
Unorthodox
Beliefs about suffering that include a divine being without  
  characteristics of omnipotence, beneficence, or perfection
102 
Relational Spirituality in Psychotherapy
view. Ground-of-being theologians do not view the divine as personal or as 
"good" and caring in a humanly recognizable way (Wildman, 2017, 2018). 
They regard suffering as ontologically part of divine creativity and also part of 
the evolutionary fate of humans and all creatures in the world, not as a side 
effect of other processes that are good. Ground-of-being understandings can 
be found in religious naturalism and some traditions of Buddhism, Hinduism, 
Chinese philosophy, atheism, and mysticism, and these views often place 
total responsibility on human agency for the alleviation of suffering.
From a relational spirituality perspective, there are several questions related 
to these existential and relational themes that are important to consider 
across these views and can serve to differentiate clients' suffering narratives. 
It is also valuable as clinicians to be aware of our own views about suffering 
and ways this may influence our approach to therapy, particularly in cases 
of extreme suffering and trauma. For example:
1. Does suffering have a growth-oriented or moral meaning and purpose we 
should seek to understand, or is it random?
2. If suffering is intended for growth, does that make God or the sacred cruel, 
loving, or impersonal/pragmatic?
3. Does God or the sacred actually control suffering, or is suffering more a 
result of (a) natural processes and human freedom, and/or (b) other sources 
of spiritual, ancestral, or interpersonal malevolence or retribution?
4. Is it acceptable to express anger, disappointment, or confusion with God or 
the sacred related to suffering, or is it more mature to suppress or repress 
such feelings and prioritize dwelling over seeking?
5. Does God or the sacred actually suffer along with humanity or remain 
beyond the experiential realities of suffering?
6. Is suffering always intended to achieve some type of justice (i.e., it is morally 
deserved), or do the vicissitudes of suffering sometimes unfold in a tragic 
fashion outside of any moral ledger?
7. Is it important to seek healing or liberation in the present life, or should 
the focus rather be on transcending this life and finding transformation in a 
future life?
Note the implicit themes in these questions: presence versus distance, 
meaning versus randomness, cruelty versus love, justice versus tragedy, 
control versus freedom, and authentic expression versus suppression or repres-
sion. Based on the RSM, we expect these differing existential and relational 
beliefs about suffering will not only influence coping strategies and assumed 
pathways toward healing but may also surface in important ways within the 
therapy relationship and in client assumptions about the therapist. Clients 
may also have had formative interpersonal experiences and responses to their 
relational spiritual dynamics involving suffering; for example, a parent or 
Anxiety, Relational Trauma, and Suffering
 103
religious leader disapproving of their questions about God's role in their 
trauma. Exline and Grubbs (2011) found that among those who are angry at 
God, supportive and empathic relational responses tend to promote spiritual 
approach behaviors (i.e., engaging their spirituality) whereas unsupportive 
and shaming responses tend to be associated with continued anger, suppres-
sion, distancing from spirituality, and substance abuse.
RELATIONAL SPIRITUALITY AND  

THE SUFFERING-TRAUMA MATRIX
We have covered several complex topics in this chapter--anxiety, trauma, 
existential themes, and suffering narratives--and we integrate these ideas in 
the clinical chapters to follow; however, we will summarize some key points 
here. Figure 4.1 depicts our RSM conceptualization of the suffering-trauma 
matrix, which extends the trauma matrix concept to more broadly include 
suffering narratives. Anxiety and trauma symptoms emerge within a triangle 
of influence that includes (a) deeper existential anxieties, (b) suffering narra-
tives, and (c) relational spirituality dynamics. Too often, clinical approaches to 
anxiety and trauma fail to assess client perspectives on the suffering-trauma 
matrix and thus neglect potentially important dynamics related to diversity, 
meaning, and ultimate concerns. We have seen other cases where clinicians 
have imposed particular narratives about suffering, meaning, and spirituality 
that do not fit client worldviews, and this runs the risk of retraumatizing 
some clients. Several other summary points follow from the material in this 
chapter.
First, the Western concept of 
trauma
 seems to have emerged in 19th-century 
British discourse about the psychological impact of railroad accidents and 
introduced an implicit "accident cosmology," or the notion that certain trau-
matic events happen due to chaotic natural forces without culpability by the 
victim (Luckhurst, 2008). The diagnostic categories related to trauma took 
further shape and medical legitimation during the 1980s and following both 
the Vietnam War and increasing social consciousness of sexual abuse and rape. 
Existential
Anxieties
Suffering
Narratives
Relational
Spirituality
Dynamics
Anxiety  &
Trauma
Symptoms
FIGURE 4.1.
 Relational Spirituality Model (RSM) Suffering-Trauma Matrix
104 
Relational Spirituality in Psychotherapy
Trauma has become a crucial mental health concept. Yet it is also important 
to be cognizant that the language of trauma will be unfamiliar to some clients, 
and the associated accident cosmology may also diverge from the suffering 
narratives of certain clients. It is important to engage in relationally sensitive 
assessment of client's understandings of anxiety, suffering, and healing. We 
believe therapists should start by working from clients' worldviews and tradi-
tions (i.e., their suffering and healing narratives) while also beginning to 
dialogue about clinical perspectives and interventions that could prove help-
ful. This requires clinicians to begin to develop multilingual capacities related 
to suffering; that is, the ability to utilize and integrate different forms of 
language for suffering and healing (e.g., clinical, existential, sociocultural, 
spiritual, religious; Dueck & Reimer, 2009).
Second, some clients will be focused on spiritual dwelling or trying to 
regain the sense of community and orientation offered by attachments to 
sources of dwelling to cope with their suffering. If prior sources of dwelling 
have been lost due to factors such as migration, relational conflicts, or threats 
to their worldview, these clients will often struggle with some combination of 
guilt, existential or spiritual disorientation, ambiguity about norms and values, 
and anxiety about abandonment or isolation. They may unconsciously (or 
consciously) long to return to a well-ordered experience of community and 
reconciled relationships. Other seeking-oriented clients may struggle with a 
risk of despair if their personal pursuits for meaning and significance seem to 
be proving vulnerable or unsuccessful (Sullivan, 2016). Whereas dwellers 
tend to fear negation of their worldview and community, seekers tend to be 
anxious about the existential negation of the self and threats to self-agency in 
trying to develop a meaningful life. These anxieties are not mutually exclu-
sive; for example, seekers may also feel both the loss of familiar sources of 
community as they differentiate and engulfment anxiety as they reengage 
former relationships.
Finally, with our RSM we are advocating clinician respect for clients' 
particular relational spirituality orientations while also advancing the idea 
that healing in response to suffering and trauma typically involves growth  
in balancing dwelling and seeking in safe, socially just holding environments. 
In addressing Black existentialism, Vereen and colleagues, drawing on the work 
of hooks (1989, 1990) and others, have identified the existential need among 
Blacks for "homeplaces" (Vereen et al., 2017, p. 79) or safe and secure relation-
ships and decolonized communities that can hold the anxiety-provoking 
process of meaning construction and reconstruction in the face of profound 
suffering and racialized trauma. This can be particularly challenging to find 
for individuals from many different nondominant and oppressed groups, since 
social systems frequently lack sufficient awareness and sensitivity to the 
chronic traumatic impact of oppression. In the chapters that follow, we describe 
an approach to psychotherapy that uses the therapeutic relationship and 
other relational resources to help clients develop healthy capacities to balance 
dwelling and seeking in their ongoing process of healing and growth.
Anxiety, Relational Trauma, and Suffering
 105
CONCLUSION
In this chapter, we have argued that anxiety and trauma always have existen-
tial dimensions. Understanding these existential dimensions of anxiety can 
illuminate key themes within what we call the suffering-trauma matrix, but 
this also requires clinician diversity sensitivity and openness to the varieties of 
views of suffering and illness narratives (see Chapter 1). We have also further 
emphasized the role of relational dynamics in anxiety, trauma, suffering, and 
growth consistent with our RSM emphasis on relational factors in psycho-
therapy. In Part II (Chapters 5, 6, and 7), we consider three core relational 
development systems--attachment, differentiation, and intersubjectivity-- 
as they integrate with our RSM approach to psychotherapy.
