51

Preparations for Exercise 3
1. Read the instructions in Chapter 2.
2. Download the Deliberate Practice Reaction Form and the Deliberate Practice Diary 
Form at https://www.apa.org/pubs/books/deliberatepracticepsychodynamic 
psychotherapy (see the "Clinician and Practitioner Resources" tab; also available in 
Appendixes A and B, respectively).
Skill Description

Skill Difficulty Level: Intermediate
Of the seven strategies that distinguish manualized psychodynamic therapy from 
manualized cognitive behavior therapy, the first one mentioned is the analyst's focus 
on affect and expression of emotion (Blagys & Hilsenroth, 2000). Research indicates 
that the more patients become aware of and experience their emotions in therapy, 
the more their outcomes are improved (Furrow et  al., 2012; Lane et  al., 2015). And 
recent findings indicate that in psychodynamic therapy in particular, helping patients 
experience their feelings leads to their better functioning (H. Fisher et al., 2016). There
fore, the psychodynamic therapist must be an emotional detective/midwife/catalyst--
capable of evoking and deepening emotion so that the patient's nascent emotions can 
be recognized, named, and understood and become gateways for change.
Empathic evocations are used to "bring experience to life through vivid imagery, 
elaborate description, analogy, or metaphor" (Goldman et al., 2021, p. 83). They help 
patients get in touch with the depth of their emotional experience--especially involving 
emotions that they avoid and that may be at the root of the patient's conflicts. In this 
way, patients can begin to appreciate the enormous way emotions are implicated in 
Deepening Emotional Experience

3

E X E R C I S E
Deliberate Practice Exercises for Psychodynamic Therapy Skills
their sense of self, motivation, values, and capacities for relationships. Quite often ther
apists will use their voice and intonation to match emotions that are on the verge of 
awareness or expression (e.g., soft and slow to bring out sadness). Another technique 
involves therapists speaking as if they were the patient (e.g., using the first person "I"). 
In knowing which way to proceed, the therapist should be guided by what feels like the 
most poignant aspect of the patient's message, whether this is conveyed through the 
patient's words, face, body, or posture.
The trainee should improvise a response to each patient description following one 
or more of these skill options:
* 
Option 1: Use vivid language and match your tone of voice and manner to the 
patient's underlying emotion.
 This helps fan the patient's flickering emotional 
embers into flames visible to the patient and the therapist.
* 
Option 2: Use an "I" statement spoken as if it is from the patient's point of view.
This shows the therapist's willingness to put themselves in the shoes of the patient 
and dramatically seeds an emotional tone.
* 
Option 3: Use a metaphor or analogy.
 As in poetic and dramatic speech, metaphors 
and analogies convey feelings with immediacy.
SKILL OPTIONS FOR EXERCISE 3
1. Use one or more of the following to intensify the most poignant feeling and mean
ing embedded within the patient's statement:
* Option 1: Use vivid language and match your tone of voice and manner to the 
patient's underlying emotion.
* Option 2: Use an "I" statement spoken as if it is from the patient's point of view.
* Option 3: Use a metaphor or analogy.
Examples of the Therapist Deepening Emotional Experience

Example 1
PATIENT:
 [
angry
] I would like my mother to listen to me.
THERAPIST:
 You'd like to grab her by the shoulders and force her to listen! (Option 1)
Example 2
PATIENT:
[
angry
] I would like my mother to listen to me.
THERAPIST:
 [
intensifying the patient's firm tone
] Mother, I need you to listen to me right 
now! (Options 1 and 2)
Example 3
PATIENT:
 [
angry
] I would like my mother to listen to me.
THERAPIST:
 Her listening to you would take 50 pounds off your shoulders. (Option 3)
Deepening Emotional Experience
53

INSTRUCTIONS FOR EXERCISE 3
Step 1: Role-Play and Feedback
* The patient says the first beginner patient statement. The therapist 
improvises
 a 
response based on the skill option.
* The trainer (or, if not available, the patient) provides 
brief
 feedback based on the skill 
option.
* The patient then repeats the same statement, and the therapist again improvises a 
response. The trainer (or patient) again provides brief feedback.
Step 2: Repeat
* Repeat Step 1 for all the statements 
in the current difficulty level
 (beginner, 
intermediate, or advanced).
Step 3: Assess and Adjust Difficulty
* The therapist completes the Deliberate Practice Reaction Form (see Appendix A) and 
decides whether to make the exercise easier or harder or to repeat the same difficulty 
level.
Step 4: Repeat for Approximately 15 Minutes
* Repeat Steps 1 to 3 for at least 15 minutes.
* The trainees then switch therapist and patient roles and start over.
54
Deliberate Practice Exercises for Psychodynamic Therapy Skills
Now it's your turn! Follow Steps 1 and 2 from the exercise instructions.
Remember:
 The goal of the roleplay is for trainees to practice improvising responses to 
the patient statements in a manner that (a) uses the skill option and (b) feels authentic 
for the trainee. 
Example therapist responses for each patient statement are provided 

at the end of this exercise.

Trainees should attempt to improvise their own responses 

before reading the example responses.

BEGINNER-LEVEL PATIENT STATEMENTS FOR EXERCISE 3

Beginner Patient Statement 1

[Anxious]
 My boss called on me in the middle of the meeting, and I got so anxious I couldn't 
speak and everyone just stared at me.
Beginner Patient Statement 2

[Matter-of-fact]
 My grown children went away and left me alone, and I've been alone all 
weekend. So that's all that's been happening.
Beginner Patient Statement 3

[Mournful]
 And back when I was in school, none of the girls seemed to like me. I don't 
know why.
Beginner Patient Statement 4
[Angry, clenched jaw]
 And, in the meeting, no one acknowledged my observations.
Beginner Patient Statement 5

[Exasperated]
 The other speaker droned on and on, limiting my time to speak.
Assess and adjust the difficulty before moving to the next difficulty level 

(see Step 3 in the exercise instructions).
Deepening Emotional Experience
55

INTERMEDIATE-LEVEL PATIENT STATEMENTS FOR EXERCISE 3

Intermediate Patient Statement 1

[Ashamed]
 When I was a kid, my mother told me not to dwell on my sad feelings; I should 
be thankful for what I have.
Intermediate Patient Statement 2

[Sad]
 My grown children act like they don't really need me; and that's OK with me because 
I have plenty of other people in my life.
Intermediate Patient Statement 3

[Confused]
 I drive for 2 hours to see my partner every weekend. Once in a while, it would 
be nice for them to come and see me.
Intermediate Patient Statement 4

[Voice quivering]
 If my daughter were to move away, I don't know what I would do.
Intermediate Patient Statement 5

[Tearful]
 I just feel so upset; I can't stop crying!
Assess and adjust the difficulty before moving to the next difficulty level 

(see Step 3 in the exercise instructions).

56
Deliberate Practice Exercises for Psychodynamic Therapy Skills
ADVANCED-LEVEL PATIENT STATEMENTS FOR EXERCISE 3

Advanced Patient Statement 1

[Matter-of-fact]
 My doctor sent me here because they think I'm depressed. I don't know 
how they got that idea. Everything in my life is going very well.
Advanced Patient Statement 2

[Flat affect]
 It's hard to say my stepfather made me have sex, but it came down to that.
Advanced Patient Statement 3

[Indignant]
 People call me "Professor," not "Mr.," if you don't mind.
Advanced Patient Statement 4

[Tearing up]
 I'm sorry about having to use so many of your Kleenex today.
Advanced Patient Statement 5

[Irritated]
 My partner was picking me up from school where I teach. I was talking to some 
of my students when my partner pulled up and yelled at me to hurry up.
Assess and adjust the difficulty here (see Step 3 in the exercise instructions). 

If appropriate, follow the instructions to make the exercise even more 

challenging (see Appendix A).
Deepening Emotional Experience
57

Example Therapist Responses: Deepening Emotional Experience
Remember:
 Trainees should attempt to improvise their own responses before reading 
the example responses. 
Do not read the following responses verbatim unless you are 

having trouble coming up with your own responses!

EXAMPLE RESPONSES TO BEGINNER-LEVEL  

PATIENT STATEMENTS FOR EXERCISE 3

Example Response to Beginner Patient Statement 1
It's like all of a sudden everyone was looking at me and I just wanted to crawl into a hole. 
(Options 2 and 3)
Example Response to Beginner Patient Statement 2
So they went away and left you all alone, like you didn't matter. That sounds really painful. 
(Option 1)
Example Response to Beginner Patient Statement 3
Sounds like that is still sad for you to think about all these years later. (Option 1)
Example Response to Beginner Patient Statement 4
From the look on your face now, you could have spit fire. (Option 3)
Example Response to Beginner Patient Statement 5
It must have felt like torture, waiting for your turn to speak. (Options 1 and 3)
58
Deliberate Practice Exercises for Psychodynamic Therapy Skills
EXAMPLE RESPONSES TO INTERMEDIATE-LEVEL  

PATIENT STATEMENTS FOR EXERCISE 3

Example Response to Intermediate Patient Statement 1
So no matter what you are feeling now as an adult, you hear your mother's voice ringing in 
your ears, "Don't feel; be thankful!" (Options 1 and 3)
Example Response to Intermediate Patient Statement 2
I hear you say it's OK not to have your children be part of your life, yet your voice sounds 
quite sad as you say it. (Option 1)
Example Response to Intermediate Patient Statement 3
I drive to see my partner every weekend. Just once I'd like them to make the effort to come 
see me! (Options 1 and 2)
Example Response to Intermediate Patient Statement 4
That would feel like being set adrift in a small boat in the middle of the ocean. (Option 3)
Example Response to Intermediate Patient Statement 5
If those tears could talk, what would they say? (Options 1 and 3)
Deepening Emotional Experience
59

EXAMPLE RESPONSES TO ADVANCED-LEVEL  

PATIENT STATEMENTS FOR EXERCISE 3

Example Response to Advanced Patient Statement 1
I really don't know why I am here. My life is going really well. (Option 2)
Example Response to Advanced Patient Statement 2
Oh, my goodness. It's even hard to talk about, let alone have any feelings about! (Option 1)
Example Response to Advanced Patient Statement 3
I don't want to have my status diminished and I won't tolerate that from you. (Option 2)
Example Response to Advanced Patient Statement 4
You feel you need to apologize to me, your therapist, for showing your true feelings? 
(Option 1)
Example Response to Advanced Patient Statement 5
Did you want to disappear or disappear your partner? (Option 3)
