C
 h a P t e r
  1 6

Eating DisorDErs in ChilDrEn 

anD aDolEsCEnts

Ellen E. Fitzsimmons-Craft, Anna M. Karam, and Denise E. Wilfley
Eating disorders (EDs) are serious mental health 
problems (Klump, Bulik, Kaye, Treasure, & Tyson, 
2009). Mortality from anorexia nervosa (AN) is 
the highest of all mental disorders, with a 50-fold 
increase in the relative risk of death from suicide 
(Keel et al., 2003). Common mental health comor-
bidities include depression, anxiety, and substance 
abuse; medical complications include cardiovascular 
and neurological problems, and these disorders are 
associated with marked impairment in functioning 
(Klump et al., 2009). Delayed treatment results in 
poorer prognosis and greater relapse rates (American  
Psychiatric Association, 2006), underscoring the 
need for prevention, early identification, and effec-
tive intervention of these serious problems in youth.
Diagnosing Eating DisorDErs  

in Youth
New diagnostic criteria for EDs were published 
in 2013 in the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
 (
DSM-5
; Ameri-
can Psychiatric Association, 2013). The previous 
DSM-IV-TR
 (American Psychiatric Association, 
2000) recognized only two specific EDs--AN and 
bulimia nervosa (BN). However, a large number of 
individuals with disturbing eating problems pre-
senting for care did not meet criteria for these dis-
orders and were assigned the residual or "leftover" 
diagnostic category of ED not otherwise specified 
(EDNOS). Indeed, EDNOS, which encompassed 
a wide spectrum of EDs, including subthreshold 
AN, subthreshold BN, and binge eating disorder 
(BED), accounted for the majority of ED diagnoses 
among youth presenting for treatment (Thomas, 
Vartanian, & Brownell, 2009). This ambiguity led to 
questions regarding the clinical meaningfulness of 
EDNOS, despite research showing that EDNOS was 
associated with similar levels of psychological and 
physiological morbidity compared with recognized 
ED diagnoses (Thomas et al., 2009). The 
DSM-5
addressed these issues by broadening the diagnostic 
criteria for AN and BN, formally recognizing BED, 
and further clarifying other EDs.
anorexia nervosa
The 
DSM-5
 identifies three core diagnostic features 
of AN: significantly low body weight (Criterion A); 
intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat and/
or engaging in behaviors that interfere with weight 
gain regardless of a low body weight (Criterion B); 
and disturbance in how one's weight or shape is 
experienced, self-evaluation overly influenced by 
weight or shape, or denial of the seriousness of one's 
low body weight (Criterion C).
Youth with AN often present with extreme 
weight loss or increasing growth in height without 
corresponding weight gain. Calculating body mass 
index (BMI) percentile is useful for determining 
whether body weight is significantly low (Criterion 
A), and significantly low body weight is considered 
less than what would minimally be expected given 
a child's age, sex, developmental trajectory, and 
physical health. The Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) has used BMI-for-age below 
the 5th percentile as suggestive of underweight;
344
however, youth with a BMI above this threshold 
may be deemed significantly underweight if they fail 
to maintain their expected growth trajectory  
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
Individuals with AN typically display an intense 
fear of weight gain or becoming fat (Criterion B),  
accompanied by general preoccupation with weight, 
shape, and food (e.g., counting calories). These feel-
ings are usually not alleviated by weight loss and 
may increase as weight loss progresses. However, 
some individuals with AN, particularly younger 
individuals, deny a fear of weight gain. In these 
cases, persistent engagement in behaviors that pre-
vent weight gain can be used to establish Criterion 
B, including strict dieting, restriction of whole food 
groups (e.g., new-onset vegetarianism), and/or 
excessive physical activity that is engaged in rigidly. 
Dietary restriction and exercise may be pursued to 
the exclusion of other activities, and individuals 
may refuse to eat foods that were once enjoyed or 
avoid meals with others.
The experience and significance of weight and 
shape are often distorted among individuals with 
AN (Criterion C). Many perceive themselves as 
being globally overweight despite being emaciated. 
Others may recognize their overall thinness but per-
ceive certain body parts (e.g., abdomen, buttocks, 
thighs) as "too fat." Furthermore, individuals often 
engage in a variety of body checking techniques to 
continually evaluate their shape and weight (e.g., 
frequent weighing, excessive mirror use), and self-
esteem is highly dependent on weight and shape.
Notably, amenorrhea (the loss or lack of onset of 
the menstrual period) was removed as a diagnostic 
criteria for AN in the 
DSM-5
 given that it excluded 
boys, premenarchal girls, and girls taking contra-
ceptives; however, delayed or interrupted pubertal 
development is often present among youth with AN 
(Rosen, 2010). Most individuals with AN also expe-
rience their symptoms as ego-syntonic and have 
pride in their ability to engage in extreme dietary 
restriction and exercise. Current symptoms, over 
the past three months, may be described as  
falling into one of two subtypes: (a) restricting type, 
whereby the individual does not engage in  
recurrent episodes of binge eating or purging; or  
(b) binge-eating/purging type for individuals who 
have engaged in recurrent binge eating or purging 
(self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, 
diuretics, or enemas).
Bulimia nervosa
There are three essential features of BN according to the 
DSM-5
: recurrent episodes of binge eating (i.e., eating 
an objectively large amount of food while experiencing 
loss of control [LOC]; Criterion A), recurrent inappro-
priate compensatory behaviors to prevent weight gain 
(e.g., self-induced vomiting; misuse of laxatives, diuret-
ics, or other medications; fasting; excessive exercise; 
Criterion B), and undue influence of body shape and 
weight on self-evaluation (Criterion D). The binge eat-
ing and compensatory behaviors must occur, on aver-
age, at least once per week for three months (Criterion 
C), and the diagnosis of BN excludes individuals meet-
ing criteria for AN (Criterion E; American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013).
To be defined as a binge eating episode, the 
amount of food consumed must be larger than most 
individuals would eat in a similar period under simi-
lar circumstances. Context needs to be considered, 
as an amount that would be regarded as excessive for 
a regular meal may not be considered excessive in 
certain circumstances (e.g., a holiday meal). The food 
must also be consumed in a discrete period, typically 
defined as less than 2 hours, and snacking or grazing 
throughout the day would not be considered a binge. 
This excessive food consumption must be accompa-
nied by LOC, defined as the inability to refrain from 
eating or to stop eating once started. Binge eating 
episodes are followed by a desire to purge, or com-
pensate for the calories consumed, with self-induced 
vomiting being the most common compensatory 
behavior among individuals with BN (American Psy-
chiatric Association, 2013). Individuals with BN usu-
ally weigh within the normal or high normal range, 
with lower BMIs associated with a history of AN; 
however, the percentage of individuals with BN who 
are overweight or obese has increased in recent years 
(Bulik, Marcus, Zerwas, Levine, & La Via, 2012).
Binge Eating Disorder
The 
DSM-5
 is the first edition to formally recognize 
BED, but past research has established its clini-
cal significance (Wilfley, Wilson, & Agras, 2003). 
Eating Disorders in Children and Adolescents
345
The 
DSM-5
 defines BED as recurrent episodes of 
binge eating (Criterion A) that occur, on average, at 
least once per week for three months (Criterion D). 
Additionally, the binge eating must cause marked 
distress (Criterion C) and include three or more of 
the following five features: (a) eating much more 
rapidly than normal; (b) eating until feeling uncom-
fortably full; (c) eating large amounts when not 
feeling physically hungry; (d) eating alone because 
of embarrassment by how much one is eating; and 
(e) feeling disgusted, depressed, or guilty after binge 
eating (Criterion B). The distinguishing feature 
between BED and BN is that binge eating episodes 
are not accompanied by compensatory behavior in 
BED, and the diagnosis of BED excludes individuals 
meeting criteria for AN or BN (Criterion E; Ameri-
can Psychiatric Association, 2013). The guidelines 
for determining whether an eating episode qualifies 
as a binge are the same for BN. In terms of weight 
status, nearly three-quarters of those with BED are 
overweight or obese (Kessler et al., 2013).
other Diagnostic Categories
Additional diagnostic categories include other speci-
fied feeding or eating disorder (OSFED), avoid-
ant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID), and 
unspecified feeding or eating disorder (UFED). 
OSFED refers to EDs that cause clinically significant 
distress or impairment but that do not meet full 
criteria for AN, BN, or BED. Examples that can be 
specified using OSFED include atypical AN (i.e., 
weight within normal range), subthreshold BN 
(i.e., low frequency and/or limited duration), sub-
threshold BED (i.e., low frequency and/or limited 
duration), purging disorder (i.e., recurrent purging 
in the absence of binge eating), and night eating 
syndrome (i.e., recurrent episodes of night eat-
ing; eating after awakening from sleep or excessive 
food consumption after the evening meal). ARFID 
involves avoidance or restriction of food intake that 
manifests in a failure to meet appropriate nutritional 
and/or energy needs. It is distinct from AN in that 
shape and weight concerns do not appear to be the 
driving force behind the food restriction or avoid-
ance (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). 
Rather, those behaviors may be driven by sensory 
characteristics of the food (e.g., textural aversions, 
extreme sensitivity to color or smell, fear of choking 
or vomiting). UFED comprises any other ED that 
causes clinically significant distress or impairment 
that does not fit into other categories (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2013).
assEssmEnt
Relative to assessing adults for EDs, assessing youth is 
particularly challenging. Certain difficulties are pres-
ent with adults as well (e.g., reliance on self-report, 
the ego-syntonic nature of many EDs). However, 
there are difficulties unique to the assessment of 
youth: cognitive limitations inherent to normal devel-
opmental stage, which may lead to difficulty under-
standing somewhat abstract concepts like LOC and 
overvaluation of shape and weight; changing healthy 
weight targets due to physical maturation; variability 
in the onset of pubertal indicators (e.g., menarche) 
that relate to ED diagnostic criteria; lack of insight 
into the severity of the problem; and motivation to 
want to actively deny or minimize symptoms to avoid 
intervention efforts that may be imposed by caretak-
ers to continue ED behaviors (Couturier & Lock, 
2006; Loeb, Brown, & Goldstein, 2011). Effective 
assessment of EDs in youth must accurately measure 
the ED symptoms, consider information gathered 
considering normal youth development, and use 
multiple informants (Lock & Le Grange, 2013; Loeb, 
Brown, & Goldstein, 2011; Micali & House, 2011). 
To conduct the most accurate assessment, it is best 
when the youth and parents are interviewed sepa-
rately (Lock & Le Grange, 2013).
interview measures
In addition to the usual clinical interview, there are 
several standardized, semi-structured interviews 
used specifically for evaluating and diagnosing EDs 
in youth. Semi-structured interviews are consid-
ered the gold standard for generating ED diagnoses. 
Interviewers play an active role in the process and 
can help define and clarify constructs. See  
Table 16.1 for an overview.
self-report Questionnaires
Although self-report questionnaires cannot 
replace a clinical or semi-structured interview 
Fitzsimmons-Craft, Karam, and Wilfley
346
for making a diagnosis of an ED, they can serve 
a number of useful purposes: (a) they can serve 
as a screening instrument to suggest that a clini-
cal interview is warranted; (b) they can provide a 
numerical indication of symptom severity;  
(c) given the heterogeneity in symptom presen-
tation, they can inform treatment planning by 
identifying which issues may be most salient to 
address; and (d) they can be useful for assessing 
treatment progress, as they can be administered 
numerous times (Crowther & Sherwood, 1997). 
See Table 16.2 for an overview of self-report 
measures, including those originally designed 
for adults that have been used with children and 
adolescents and measures specifically designed 
for use in youth.
Parental involvement
Parents are particularly important for assessing youth 
for an ED. In terms of a clinical interview, the Eating 
Disorder Examination has been modified for use with 
parents (Couturier, Lock, Forsberg, Vanderheyden, & 
Yen, 2007; Loeb, 2008). Research has demonstrated 
that parent information is particularly important for 
diagnosing youth with AN or restrictive-type EDs, 
given their tendency to underreport dietary restraint 
and weight concerns (Couturier et al., 2007). If possi-
ble, it is best to have both parents present for the evalu-
ation, especially when both are involved in the care of 
the individual; this sets the tone for the involvement 
of both parents in the health of the individual and pro-
vides comprehensive information about the youth and 
family from multiple perspectives (Lock & Le Grange, 
2013). In terms of a self-report measure for parents, the 
Questionnaire of Eating and Weight Patterns-Parent 
(Johnson, Grieve, Adams, & Sandy, 1999) can be used 
to diagnostically assess the presence of BN and BED 
in youth, and a parent version of the Eating Disorder 
Examination-Questionnaire has also been developed 
(Loeb, 2007).
taBlE 16.1

semi-structured interviews for assessing Eating Disorders and their Psychopathology in Children  

and adolescents
Interview
Citation
Description
Eating Disorder Examination
Fairburn, Cooper, and O'Connor, 2008
Assesses the frequency and severity of 
behavioral and attitudinal symptoms of 
eating disorders; considered the "gold 
standard" for assessing eating disorder 
psychopathology; first developed for use 
with adults but commonly used for the 
assessment of adolescents.
Child Version of the EDE
Bryant-Waugh, Cooper, Taylor, and Lask, 
1996
Modified from the Eating Disorder 
Examination with the goal of making the 
interview more understandable and more 
accurate for use with youth.
Structured Interview for Anorexic and 
Bulimic Syndromes for Expert Rating
Fichter, Herpertz, Quadflieg, and Herpertz-
Dahlmann, 1998
Used for diagnosing EDs and also 
for assessing a broad array of 
psychopathology related to EDs, including 
body image disturbance, substance 
abuse, social integration, sexuality, 
depression, anxiety, and compulsion.
Clinical Eating Disorders Rating  
Instrument
Palmer, Christie, Cordle, Davies, and 
Kenrick, 1987
Assesses the behaviors and beliefs 
associated with anorexia nervosa and 
bulimia nervosa, as well as features of 
general psychopathology.
Note
. EDE = Eating Disorder Examination; ED 
=
 eating disorder.
Eating Disorders in Children and Adolescents
347
(
continues
)
taBlE 16.2

self-report Questionnaires for assessing Eating Disorders and their Psychopathology in Children  

and adolescents
Questionnaire
Citation
Construct assessed
Number of items
Scale
Strengths and  
weaknesses
Self-report measures originally developed for adults but used with youth
Bulimia 
Test--Revised
Thelen, Farmer, 
Wonderlich, and 
Smith, 1991
Symptoms of BN
36
5-point scale, with 
differing anchors
Demonstrated 
psychometric 
properties in youth
Eating Attitudes 
Test--26
Garner, Olmstead, 
Bohr, and Garfinkel, 
1982
Eating disorder 
attitudes and 
behaviors
26
6-point scale  
ranging from 
never
to 
always
Score of 20 indicates 
a probable eating 
disorder; limited 
evidence of 
reliability and 
validity in youth
Eating Disorder 
Diagnostic Scale
Stice, Telch, and 
Rizvi, 2000
Symptoms of AN, 
BN, and BED to 
generate 
DSM-IV
diagnoses
22
Uses a combination  
of Likert-type 
(0 to 6), yes/no, 
frequency, and 
write-in response 
formats
Demonstrated 
psychometric 
properties in youth
Eating Disorder  
Examination- 
Questionnaire
Fairburn and Beglin, 
1994
Disordered eating 
thoughts and 
behaviors over 
the past 28 days; 
4 subscales are 
generated (i.e., 
eating concern, 
shape concern, 
weight concern, 
and dietary 
restraint), as well 
as a global score 
and frequencies 
of eating disorder 
behaviors (e.g., 
binge eating and 
purging)
36
Most items  
assessed on a  
0 to 6 scale, with 
differing anchors, 
and others use a 
write-in response 
format
Self-report measure 
that was adapted 
from the gold 
standard interview, 
the EDE; support 
for its use in youth 
but provides 
less accurate 
information than 
the EDE
Eating Disorder 
Inventory
Garner, Olmstead, 
and Polivy, 1983
Psychological 
and behavioral 
traits common 
in AN and BN; 8 
subscales (i.e., 
drive for thinness, 
bulimia, body 
dissatisfaction, 
ineffectiveness, 
perfectionism, 
interpersonal 
distrust, 
interoceptive 
awareness, and 
maturity fears)
64
6-point scale  
ranging from  
never
 to 
always
Some evidence for 
its psychometric 
properties in youth
Fitzsimmons-Craft, Karam, and Wilfley
348
taBlE 16.2

self-report Questionnaires for assessing Eating Disorders and their Psychopathology in Children  

and adolescents
Questionnaire
Citation
Construct assessed
Number of items
Scale
Strengths and  
weaknesses
Eating Pathology 
Symptoms 
Inventory
Forbush et al., 2013
Multidimensional 
measure of 
eating pathology; 
8 subscales 
(i.e., body 
dissatisfaction, 
binge eating, 
cognitive restraint, 
purging, restricting, 
excessive exercise, 
negative attitudes 
toward obesity, and 
muscle building)
45
5-point scale  
ranging from  
never
 to  
very often
Psychometric 
properties not yet 
demonstrated in 
youth
SCOFF
Morgan, Reid, and 
Lacey, 1999
Screening 
questionnaire that 
addresses the core 
features of AN and 
BN
 5
Yes/no
Can be administered 
orally or in written 
form; some 
evidence for its 
psychometric 
properties in youth
Self-report measures developed for youth
Children's Eating 
Attitudes Test
Maloney, McGuire, 
and Daniels, 1988
Eating disorder 
attitudes and 
behaviors
26
6-point scale  
ranging from  
never
 to 
always
May be reliably used 
for children as 
young as 8 years
Eating Disorder 
Inventory for 
Children
Garner, 1991
Multidimensional 
symptoms of 
eating disorders; 
11 subscales 
(i.e., body 
dissatisfaction, 
drive for 
thinness, bulimia, 
interoceptive 
awareness, 
impulse regulation, 
asceticism, 
social insecurity, 
maturity fears, 
ineffectiveness, 
perfectionism, 
and interpersonal 
distrust)
91
6-point scale  
ranging from  
never
 to 
always
Specifically 
formulated for 
children and 
adolescents and 
demonstrated 
psychometric 
properties in youth
Kids' Eating  
Disorders Survey
Childress,  
Brewerton,  
Hodges and  
Jarrell, 1993
Eating disorder 
symptoms in 
children
14
Yes/no/?
Developed specifically 
to assess eating 
disorder symptoms 
in children and 
demonstrated 
psychometric 
properties in youth
(

Continued

)
Eating Disorders in Children and Adolescents
349
other Essential Components of Eating 

Disorders assessment in Youth
In addition to conducting a thorough assessment of 
the ED symptoms, it is also necessary to gain a com-
plete mental health picture of the patient, which can 
be facilitated by using a semi-structured interview like 
the Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia 
for School-Age Children-Present and Lifetime Version 
(Kaufman et al., 1997). This interview has demon-
strated psychometric properties, and it integrates parent 
and child report for making diagnoses and gather-
ing a comprehensive history. It is also recommended 
that assessment include a family psychiatric history 
to understand the history of mental health problems, 
including eating and other disorders.
Additionally, ED assessment in youth should 
involve a basic medical examination, including a 
complete physical as well as laboratory tests, as by 
the time the patient presents for treatment, there 
may have been a prolonged period of weight loss 
and/or binge eating and purging, which can have 
serious medical consequences. Indeed, EDs can 
affect every organ system, and serious medical com-
plications can occur at any weight (Campbell & 
Peebles, 2014). Among low-weight patients, a stan-
dard initial assessment should include a complete 
blood count; an electrolyte battery; an electrocardio-
gram; liver, kidney, and thyroid function tests; and a 
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry to measure bone 
mineral density. Among individuals who purge, an 
electrolyte battery and a dental evaluation should  
be included in the standard evaluation (Crow & 
Swigart, 2007). These examinations help to assess 
the degree of illness and chronicity and can also 
taBlE 16.2

self-report Questionnaires for assessing Eating Disorders and their Psychopathology in Children  

and adolescents
Questionnaire
Citation
Construct assessed
Number of items
Scale
Strengths and  
weaknesses
Questionnaire for  
Eating and  
Weight  
Patterns-- 
Adolescent  
Version
Johnson, Grieve, 
Adams, and Sandy, 
1999
BN and BED in youth
12
Uses a combination  
of yes/no and  
5-point scales
Generates diagnoses 
of BN and BED 
and assesses their 
behavioral and 
cognitive features; 
parent version 
available
Youth Eating  
Disorder 
Examination- 
Questionnaire
Goldschmidt, Doyle, 
and Wilfley, 2007
Disordered eating 
thoughts and 
behaviors over 
the past 28 days; 
4 subscales are 
generated (i.e., 
eating concern, 
shape concern, 
weight concern, 
dietary restraint), 
as well as a 
global score and 
frequencies of 
eating disorder 
behaviors (e.g., 
binge eating and 
purging)
39
Most items  
assessed on a  
0 to 6 scale, with 
differing anchors, 
and others use a 
write-in response 
format
Adapted for a third-
grade reading 
level and examples 
and pictures are 
provided
Note
. BN 
=
 bulimia nervosa; AN 
=
 anorexia nervosa; BED 
=
 binge eating disorder; 
DSM-IV = Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders
, 
4th edition
; EDE 
=
 Eating Disorder Examination.
(

Continued

)
Fitzsimmons-Craft, Karam, and Wilfley
350
help to rule out organic causes for weight loss, such 
as thyroid disease or diabetes. Given the severe, 
possibly life-threatening effects of EDs, physicians 
should remain involved throughout the course of 
treatment, and clinicians need to be aware that at 
any time the need for acute medical hospitalization 
may arise (Lock & Le Grange, 2013).
influencing Factors to Consider
There are additional factors that may influence 
the diagnosis of EDs in youth. First, as noted, age 
is an influencing factor, as denial of symptoms is 
more common among younger individuals with 
EDs (Couturier & Lock, 2006). Second, although 
EDs do not discriminate and affect youth across all 
racial and ethnic groups, individuals from racial/
ethnic minority backgrounds are significantly less 
likely than their White counterparts to receive care, 
a referral for further evaluation, or to even be asked 
by a doctor about ED symptoms (Becker, Franko, 
Speck, & Herzog, 2003; Marques et al., 2011). 
Additionally, racial/ethnic differences in clinical pre-
sentation are apparent (e.g., Black and Asian indi-
viduals with AN may not present with body image 
distortion) and may influence the likelihood of an 
individual being diagnosed with an ED (Gilbert, 
2003). Third, gender may influence the likelihood 
that a child or adolescent receives an ED diagnosis. 
Indeed, girls are more likely to receive an ED diag-
nosis, even when their symptoms are identical to 
those of boys (Currin, Schmidt, & Waller, 2007). 
Therefore, clinician bias in the form of perceptions 
that boys or individuals of certain racial/ethnic 
minority backgrounds do not have EDs, may be an 
important barrier to access to care.
Differential Diagnosis
Before concluding that disordered eating symptoms 
should be attributed to an ED diagnosis, general 
medical conditions and other psychiatric disorders 
should be considered. Many serious medical ill-
nesses are associated with substantial weight loss as 
may be seen in AN, but these are relatively uncom-
mon in children and adolescents (e.g.,  
Crohn's disease, brain tumor, Type I diabetes; 
Walsh & Satir, 2005). However, the intense fear 
of weight gain, importance of weight and shape to 
self-evaluation, and reward associated with weight 
loss are not characteristic of these conditions. Like-
wise, there are some medical and neurological con-
ditions that are associated with binge eating (e.g., 
Kleine-Levin syndrome) but would not be accom-
panied by overconcern with weight and shape 
(Walsh & Satir, 2005).
Several other mental health disorders merit 
consideration before making an ED diagnosis. Nota-
bly, it is important to distinguish between ARFID 
and other EDs. ARFID is a particularly important 
diagnosis for consideration among youth, with one 
study indicating that nearly 15% of youth present-
ing for an ED evaluation receive this diagnosis 
(Ornstein et al., 2013). Other mental disorders (e.g., 
major depressive disorder) may be associated with 
weight loss or other disturbances in eating behavior 
(e.g., overeating). Likewise, some of the psycho-
logical symptoms experienced by those with social 
phobia, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), and 
body dysmorphic disorder may resemble features 
seen among those with AN. However, individuals 
with these other disorders would not display the 
same intensity of weight/shape concern as typically 
seen with an ED (Walsh & Satir, 2005).
PrEvalEnCE, inCiDEnCE, anD CoursE
Work examining the lifetime prevalence of EDs 
in children and adolescents has found rates for 
AN ranging from 0.3% to 2.0%, 0.8% to 2.6% for 
BN, 1.4% to 4.1% for BED, and 3.6% to 11.5% 
for OSFED among girls (Allen, Byrne, Oddy, & 
Crosby, 2013; Fairweather-Schmidt & Wade, 2014; 
Smink, van Hoeken, Oldehinkel, & Hoek, 2014; 
Stice, Marti, & Rohde, 2013). Limited information 
is available regarding boys, but existing data sug-
gest that the prevalence of any 
DSM-5
 ED in boys, 
including OSFED, ranges from 1.2% to 2.9% (Allen 
et al., 2013; Smink et al., 2014). Boys typically 
account for roughly 10% of ED cases (Rosen, 2010), 
but studies have found that young patients with EDs 
are more likely to be male than older patients with 
EDs (Peebles, Wilson, & Lock, 2006).
In longitudinal representative population-
based studies, incidence of AN for girls ages 15 
to 19 years has been found to be 270 per 100,000 
Eating Disorders in Children and Adolescents
351
(Keski-Rahkonen et al., 2007) and 300 per 100,000 
for BN for girls ages 16 to 20 years (Keski-Rahkonen 
et al., 2009). Regarding boys, Raevuori et al. (2009) 
found the incidence of AN in boys ages 10 to  
24 years to be 16 per 100,000 in a longitudinal rep-
resentative population-based study. From clinical 
registry data, the incidence rate of BN in boys ages 
10 to 19 years was reported to be 3 per 100,000 
(Currin, Schmidt, Treasure, & Jick, 2005). There 
are few studies reporting on EDNOS specifically, but 
Lahortiga-Ramos et al. (2005) found the incidence 
rate of EDNOS in girls 12 to 22 years to be 2,800 per 
100,000. At this juncture, information is not avail-
able on incidence of EDs using the specific diagnos-
tic criteria in 
DSM-5
.
In terms of course, AN typically begins in ado-
lescence or young adulthood. Early work described 
a bimodal distribution of age at onset for AN, 
with two peaks at 14 and 18 years (Halmi, Casper, 
Eckert, Goldberg, & Davis, 1979). More recent 
work has identified peak age of onset for AN to 
be between 15 and 19 years (Micali, Hagberg, 
Petersen, & Treasure, 2013) or 18 and 20 years 
(Stice et al., 2013; Volpe et al., 2016). Cases of early 
onset, prior to puberty commencing, have also been 
identified (Russell, 2013). The course of AN is vari-
able, with some individuals recovering after one 
episode and others experiencing a chronic course or 
periods of recovery and relapse (American Psychiatric  
Association, 2013). A review indicated that less than 
half (46%) of individuals with AN fully recover and 
20% experience a chronic course, but younger age 
at onset of illness is associated with better outcome 
(Steinhausen, 2002). AN has a mortality rate of at 
least 5% to 6% (Steinhausen, 2002)--the  
highest mortality rate of any psychiatric disorder 
(Sullivan, 1995).
BN also typically begins in adolescence or young 
adulthood, with the peak age of onset between 15 
and 20 years (Micali et al., 2013; Stice et al., 2013; 
Volpe et al., 2016). Onset before puberty is uncom-
mon (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). 
Course may be chronic or intermittent (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2013), and a review indi-
cated that less than half (45%) of individuals with 
BN exhibit full recovery (Steinhausen & Weber, 
2009). Notably, crossover to other EDs in the course 
of BN occurs in a minority of cases (10%-32%), with 
crossover to an unspecified ED most common  
(Steinhausen & Weber, 2009). Although the mortality  
rate of BN is lower than that of AN (2%; Fichter & 
Quadflieg, 2004), the risk of suicide and suicide 
attempts is higher (Herpertz-Dahlmann, 2009).
BED usually begins in adolescence or young adult-
hood but is more likely than the other EDs to develop 
later in life. Notably, recovery rates in natural course 
and treatment outcome studies are higher for BED 
than for AN or BN. Fairburn, Cooper, Doll, Norman, 
and O'Connor (2000) found that only 18% of indi-
viduals with BED in the community retained a clini-
cal ED diagnosis at 5-year follow-up. Crossover from 
BED to other EDs is relatively uncommon (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2013). Children who experi-
ence LOC eating, regardless of amount of food, are 
more likely to develop full or subthreshold BED; LOC 
eating is a concerning precursor for the development 
of this disorder (Tanofsky-Kraff et al., 2011).
Common mEntal hEalth 

ComorBiDitiEs
Youth with EDs often present with at least one other 
mental disorder and even more have met criteria for 
a comorbid mental health disorder at some point 
in their lives. Indeed, one study found that 55% of 
adolescents with AN, 88% with BN, and 84% with 
BED met criteria for at least one other 
DSM-IV
 dis-
order (Swanson, Crow, Le Grange, Swendsen, & 
Merikangas, 2011). More specifically, Swanson et al. 
(2011) demonstrated that among adolescents with 
BN or BED, respectively, 50% or 45% had a lifetime 
mood disorder, 66% or 65% had a lifetime anxiety 
disorder, 20% or 27% had a lifetime substance abuse 
or dependence disorder, and 58% or 43% had a life-
time behavioral disorder. Buhren et al. (2014) found 
that nearly 50% of adolescents with AN met criteria 
for at least one comorbid psychiatric disorder, with 
mood and anxiety disorders being the most common 
comorbidities. The binge-purge subtype was associ-
ated with increased rates of psychiatric comorbidity 
relative to the restricting subtype (Buhren et al.,  
2014). Similarly, Root et al. (2010) found that sub-
stance use disorders were more common among 
those with the binge-purge vs. the restricting 
Fitzsimmons-Craft, Karam, and Wilfley
352
subtype of AN. EDs with binge and/or purge behav-
iors may be associated with the highest levels of 
psychiatric comorbidity. Retrospective studies indi-
cate that many individuals with EDs had an anxiety 
disorder in childhood prior to the onset of their ED, 
with OCD and social phobia being most common, 
supporting the possibility that childhood anxiety 
may be one vulnerability factor for the development 
of an ED (Kaye et al., 2004).
A growing body of literature suggests that 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is 
also an important ED comorbidity. Biederman et al. 
(2007) found that girls with ADHD were 3.6 times 
more likely to meet criteria for an ED compared 
with girls without ADHD. Results from a nation-
ally representative sample also suggested that those 
with clinical ADHD were more likely to experience a 
clinical ED (Bleck, DeBate, & Olivardia, 2014).
EtiologY
There is general agreement in the field that the eti-
ology of EDs is multifactorial and is influenced by 
biological, psychological, and social factors. EDs 
are understood using a biopsychosocial framework 
(Polivy & Herman, 2002).
In terms of biology, evidence exists that EDs are 
biologically-based, serious mental health problems 
(Klump et al., 2009). First, EDs run in families, 
and twin studies reveal that additive genetic factors 
account for 40% to 60% of liability to AN, BN, and 
BED (Trace, Baker, Penas-Lledo, & Bulik, 2013). 
Additionally, neurobiological abnormalities are 
present among those with EDs (e.g., alterations in 
the dopaminergic and serotonergic systems, distur-
bances of higher-order circuits related to reward), 
but it is unclear whether these features contribute to 
the development of EDs or are their result--whether 
they are "traits" or "scars" (Kaye, Wierenga, Bailer, 
Simmons, & Bischoff-Grethe, 2013). Research is 
also ongoing to identify specific alterations in gene 
expression that may be involved in ED development 
(Trace et al., 2013). Temperament is considered 
biologically based and may contribute to ED risk as 
well, with harm avoidance and persistence emerging 
as particularly important facets (Atiye, Miettunen, & 
Raevuori-Helkamaa, 2015). Finally, gender should 
be considered an important risk factor given the 
preponderance of EDs in girls (Jacobi, Hayward, de 
Zwaan, Kraemer, & Agras, 2004).
Several psychological risk factors have been 
identified. First, body dissatisfaction or weight con-
cerns has emerged as one of the most consistent and 
robust risk factor for EDs (Jacobi et al., 2004; Stice, 
2002). For example, Killen et al. (1996) found that 
adolescent girls scoring in the highest quartile on 
weight concerns had the highest incidence (10%) 
of EDs over 4 years compared with none of the girls 
in the lowest quartile. Second, negative emotional-
ity, including tendencies to experience depression 
or anxiety, negative self-evaluation, and low self-
esteem, has also been identified as an important risk 
factor for EDs (Jacobi et al., 2004; Keel & Forney, 
2013; Polivy & Herman, 2002; Stice, 2002). Third, 
perfectionism, a personality trait typified by striv-
ing for flawlessness, is a risk factor for EDs in that 
it may promote an individual's relentless pursuit 
of the thin ideal (Stice, 2002). Fourth, dieting may 
contribute to the onset of an ED in that either the 
caloric deprivation associated with dieting may 
trigger binge eating as a way to counteract reduced 
caloric intake; violating dietary rules may result in 
disinhibited eating; or dieting may contribute to 
negative affect, which in turn may contribute to 
disordered eating (Polivy & Herman, 2002; Stice, 
2002). Fifth, thin-ideal internalization or the extent 
to which an individual "buys into" societal ideals of 
attractiveness is an important causal risk factor for 
not only body dissatisfaction but also eating distur-
bance (Stice, 2002). Sixth, impulsivity may leave an 
individual vulnerable to episodes of binge eating, 
and relatedly, substance use has also been found 
to be a risk factor for development of an ED (Stice, 
2002). Finally, other cognitive and personality fea-
tures may contribute to ED development, including 
obsessive thoughts and need for control (Polivy & 
Herman, 2002).
Social factors contribute to ED development. 
As suggested by data showing an increase in dis-
ordered eating after the introduction of television 
in Fiji, cultural context, including a high emphasis 
on the thin ideal, may be one contributor to ED 
development (Becker, Burwell, Gilman, Herzog, & 
Hamburg, 2002). However, cultural context is not a 
Eating Disorders in Children and Adolescents
353
specific causal factor as most people in cultures that 
value thinness do not develop EDs. Family factors, 
including criticism, may also play a role in ED etiol-
ogy, but current research refutes the idea that family 
is an exclusive or even primary causal risk factor 
(Le Grange, Lock, Loeb, & Nicholls, 2010). Peer 
influence is an important risk factor as well, with 
friends' dieting being predictive of use of unhealthy 
and extreme weight control behaviors and binge 
eating in girls 5 years later (Eisenberg & Neumark-
Sztainer, 2010).
Other factors that have been identified as con-
tributing to ED development include early child-
hood eating and gastrointestinal problems, sexual 
abuse and other adverse experiences, general psy-
chiatric morbidity, and elevated BMI (Hilbert et al., 
2014; Jacobi et al., 2004; Stice, 2002). In sum, the 
etiology of EDs should be considered multifactorial, 
including a combination of genetic, biological, and 
temperamental vulnerabilities that may interact with 
psychological, social, and environmental factors to 
increase risk (Klump et al., 2009).
EviDEnCE-BasED trEatmEnts
Several treatment approaches for children and ado-
lescents with EDs have been investigated, and treat-
ments are categorized as well-established, probably 
efficacious, possibly efficacious, or experimental 
based on guidelines used in the most recent review 
on evidence-based psychosocial treatments for 
EDs in youth (Lock, 2015). See Table 16.3 for an 
overview.
anorexia nervosa
Although treatment studies of childhood and ado-
lescent EDs remain few in number, treatment for 
youth with AN is the most studied, and a number 
of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have been 
conducted (i.e., Agras et al., 2014; Eisler et al., 2000; 
Geist, Heinmaa, Stephens, Davis, & Katzman, 2000; 
Godart et al., 2012; Gowers et al., 2007; Le Grange, 
Eisler, Dare, & Russell, 1992; Le Grange et al., 2016; 
Lock, Agras, Bryson, & Kraemer, 2005; Lock et al., 
2010; Madden et al., 2015; Robin et al., 1999; Rus-
sell, Szmukler, Dare, & Eisler, 1987). Collectively, 
these studies indicate that family-based treatment 
(FBT) is the most well-established treatment for 
youth with AN (Keel & Haedt, 2008; Lock, 2015).
Family-based treatment. 
FBT is a well-established 
treatment for youth with AN (Lock, 2015) and is 
often referred to as the "Maudsley method" to pay 
homage to the original development and testing of 
FBT at the Maudsley Hospital in London. Two early 
studies indicated its superiority to individual therapy. 
First, Russell et al. (1987) compared FBT with indi-
vidual supportive therapy. Although both treatments 
were efficacious, adolescents with a short duration 
of AN (i.e., less than 3 years) who received FBT had 
a significantly higher weight at the end of treatment 
taBlE 16.3

Evidence-Based Psychological treatments for Eating Disorders in Youth
Anorexia nervosa
Bulimia nervosa
Binge eating disorder
Well-established treatments
Family-based treatment
None
None
Probably efficacious treatments Systemic family therapy; 
adolescent-focused therapy
None
None
Possibly efficacious treatments
None
Family-based treatment; 
cognitive-behavioral therapy 
guided self-help
Internet-facilitated 
cognitive-behavioral 
therapy-self-help
Experimental treatments
Cognitive-behavioral therapy; 
cognitive remediation therapy
Supportive psychotherapy; 
cognitive-behavioral therapy
Interpersonal psychotherapy; 
dialectical behavior therapy
Note
. From "An Update on Evidence-Based Psychosocial Treatments for Eating Disorders in Children and Adolescents," 
by J. Lock, 2015, 
Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology
, 
44
, p. 714. Copyright 2015 by Taylor and Francis. 
Adapted with permission.
Fitzsimmons-Craft, Karam, and Wilfley
354
than those randomized to individual supportive 
therapy (Russell et al., 1987). Second, Robin et al. 
(1999) compared FBT with individual ego-oriented 
individual therapy, which included a focus on adoles-
cent self-efficacy, self-awareness, and autonomy. FBT 
was superior in terms of weight gain and return of 
menses at the end of treatment and at a 1-year follow-
up, but both treatments produced comparably large 
improvements in eating-related cognitions and more 
general psychopathology. Initial studies examining 
family therapy for AN were similar in their approach, 
but the exact protocol used differed depending on 
the study (e.g., Eisler et al., 2000; Le Grange et al., 
1992; Russell et al., 1987). There is now one treat-
ment manual for FBT that is widely used by clinicians 
(Lock & Le Grange, 2013).
The basic tenants of FBT include (a) the family 
is not blamed as the cause of the illness--FBT takes 
an agnostic stance on ED etiology and externalizes 
the disorder from the patient; (b) the adolescent is 
embedded in the family and the parents' involve-
ment in therapy is vitally important for the ultimate 
success of the treatment; therefore, parents are 
tasked with taking charge of and facilitating weight 
gain in their malnourished child; (c) the entire fam-
ily is an important part of treatment success and 
recovery from the ED; and (d) normal adolescent 
development is seen as having been interrupted by 
AN (Lock & Le Grange, 2013).
FBT is marked by three phases (Lock & Le 
Grange, 2013). Phase 1 is devoted to weight resto-
ration of the youth; the therapist tasks parents with 
this responsibility and supports and reinforces their 
efforts to refeed their child. The transition to Phase 2  
occurs when the youth can take back control of eat-
ing and his or her weight, with therapist and paren-
tal oversight. During this phase, the focus remains 
on the youth's ED symptoms in addition to other 
significant family issues. Phase 3 addresses issues 
related to adolescence (e.g., puberty, appropriate 
family boundaries, the transition to being given 
more personal autonomy) with disordered  
eating symptoms no longer a central topic.
In a study comparing the efficacy of FBT and 
adolescent-focused therapy (AFT), an individual 
treatment for adolescents with AN, Lock et al. 
(2010) found no statistically significant difference 
in remission rates between the two treatments at 
the end of treatment. However, FBT was superior 
to AFT in terms of maintaining remission status at 
6- and 12-month follow-ups. More recently, Agras 
et al. (2014) investigated the relative efficacy of a 
specific focus on ED symptoms and behaviors as 
targeted in FBT compared with systemic family 
therapy, with its more general focus on the family 
system. Findings supported both forms of family 
therapy for adolescent AN but highlighted some 
advantages of FBT: it was rated as more acceptable 
to parents; it produced more rapid patient weight 
restoration; and it was associated with reduced use 
of hospitalization, which inherently lowers the cost 
of treatment.
Notably, three RCTs have investigated whether 
the family should be considered a single unit or 
whether parents should be seen separately from 
the youth. First, Le Grange et al. (1992) compared 
conjoint FBT to parents and the youth being seen 
separately during the therapy session (Le Grange 
et al., 1992). Both forms of treatment brought about 
similar benefits. Second, Eisler et al. (2000) also 
compared conjoint to separated family therapy and 
found that both worked similarly in terms of nutri-
tional and psychological improvements and global 
outcome. However, a moderator effect revealed that 
for patients with high levels of maternal criticism, 
separated family therapy was more beneficial. Third, 
Le Grange et al. (2016) evaluated the relative effi-
cacy of FBT and parent-focused treatment (PFT), 
where the therapist met with the parents only while 
a nurse monitored the youth. PFT was more effica-
cious than FBT in precipitating remission; however, 
differences in remission rates were not apparent at 
follow-up. Collectively, these studies indicate that 
treatment for youth with AN that separates parents 
from the patient may be just as, if not more, effica-
cious than conjoint treatment.
systemic family therapy. 
Systemic family-therapy 
is considered probably efficacious for the treatment 
of youth with AN (Agras et al., 2014; Godart et al., 
2012; Lock, 2015). Although similar to FBT in its 
philosophy to involve parents and family members 
in the treatment of adolescent AN, systemic family 
therapy differs significantly from FBT in that the 
Eating Disorders in Children and Adolescents
355
treatment focuses specifically on the family system 
instead of disordered eating behavior or normal-
ization of weight (although the therapist will help 
the family address these issues if they so choose). 
The therapist adopts a neutral stance and facilitates 
communication among the family. Systemic fam-
ily therapy assumes difficulties are precipitated not 
in individuals themselves but in the relationships, 
interactions, and communication patterns that 
develop between individuals in a family system. The 
treatment assumes and highlights existing family 
strengths and builds on them to aid in recovery and 
empowerment, as well as to foster problem solving 
in the context of the family's issues that brought 
them to therapy (Agras et al., 2014). Godart et al. 
(2012) compared posthospitalization outcome for 
adolescents with AN who received treatment as 
usual or treatment as usual plus a form of systemic 
family therapy. Among completers, those who 
received family therapy demonstrated greater rates 
of good and intermediate outcomes.
adolescent-focused therapy. 
AFT, which was origi-
nally described by Robin et al. (1999) as ego-oriented 
individual therapy, is also considered a probably 
efficacious treatment for adolescent AN (Lock, 2015; 
Lock et al., 2010; Robin et al., 1999). AFT theorizes 
that individuals with AN have ego deficits and dif-
ficulty clarifying biological needs from self-control 
(Lock et al., 2010). Patients learn to identify and 
describe emotions and how to tolerate negative affect 
rather than escaping it with starvation. Phase 1 is 
marked by establishing rapport, assessing motivation, 
and developing the patient formulation. The therapist 
promotes normal eating by encouraging patients to 
discontinue dieting and promotes weight gain by set-
ting weight goals. Until the patient is weight restored, 
weight gain is actively discussed and encouraged. The 
patient is asked to take responsibility for food-related 
issues instead of tasking parents with this charge. The 
therapist encourages patients to explore and interpret 
their behaviors, emotions, and motives, and helps 
them distinguish emotions from bodily needs. Phase 2  
promotes separation and individuation and seeks to 
increase tolerance of negative mood. Phase 3 marks 
the end of treatment and focuses on termination 
(Lock et al., 2010).
Cognitive-behavioral therapy. 
Cognitive- 
behavioral therapy-enhanced (CBT-E) is considered 
an experimental treatment for youth with AN (Dalle 
Grave, Calugi, Doll, & Fairburn, 2013; Fairburn, 
2008; Lock, 2015). CBT-E was originally developed 
for adults with EDs but has since been adapted 
for treating adolescents with AN. CBT-E has three 
phases and emphasizes the core ED psychopathol-
ogy of overvaluation of body weight and shape, and 
routinely involves the patient's parents (Fairburn, 
2008). Phase 1 of CBT-E is marked by the adoles-
cent being prompted to explore the current state of 
their life and the experience of maintaining the ED, 
followed by the adolescent being gently challenged 
to consider the advantages and disadvantages of 
addressing the illness. If the patient is willing and 
motivated to proceed with treatment, the initiation 
of Phase 2 begins with emphasis on weight restora-
tion through the promotion of regular eating while 
continuing to address other ED psychopathology 
(e.g., body dissatisfaction). Homework is regularly 
assigned throughout treatment. Phase 3  
is entered into when the youth has made good 
progress and the emphasis can be shifted to mainte-
nance of the changes made. A benchmarking study 
on CBT-E for youth with AN revealed that CBT-E 
produced considerable increases in weight and sig-
nificant reductions in ED psychopathology (Dalle 
Grave et al., 2013). Further, patients could maintain 
their treatment progress with little change over the 
60-week posttreatment follow-up period.
Cognitive remediation therapy. 
Cognitive remedi-
ation therapy (CRT; Dahlgren, Lask, Landro, & Ro, 
2013; Pretorius et al., 2012; Wood, Al-Khairulla, & 
Lask, 2011) shows promise and is considered an 
experimental treatment for youth with AN (Lock, 
2015). CRT addresses cognitive processes that are 
theorized to maintain the rigid thinking (e.g., dys-
functional attention to detail, difficulties with cogni-
tive flexibility, set shifting, central coherence, and 
general ability to see the "bigger picture") shown 
to be present in patients with AN (McAnarney 
et al., 2011), instead of focusing directly on the ED 
symptoms or psychopathology (Pretorius et al., 
2012). Therefore, CRT is an adjunctive treatment 
with the hope to increase motivation and cognitive 
Fitzsimmons-Craft, Karam, and Wilfley
356
abilities to maximize efficacy of other ED treatments 
(Baldock & Tchanturia, 2007). CRT uses cognitive 
exercises with the aim to alter dysfunctional cogni-
tive patterns and strengthen thinking skills (e.g., 
cognitive flexibility, "bigger picture" thinking strate-
gies). In a pilot study, Pretorius et al. (2012) found 
a small effect of increased cognitive flexibility at 
the end of a CRT group. Dahlgren et al. (2013) also 
examined the effects of CRT in terms of neuropsy-
chological functioning in adolescents with AN. CRT 
showed significant improvements in weight, depres-
sion, visio-spatial memory, perceptual disembedding 
abilities, and verbal fluency (Dahlgren et al., 2013). 
More research is needed to better understand the 
benefits of CBT-E and CRT when treating adoles-
cents with AN.
Bulimia nervosa
To date, the evidence base for treatment for youth 
with BN is limited compared with AN, with only 
three published RCTs examining psychosocial inter-
ventions for this patient population. Two possibly 
efficacious and two experimental treatments have 
been identified (Lock, 2015).
Family-based treatment. 
FBT has been identified 
as a possibly efficacious treatment for youth with BN 
(Le Grange, Crosby, Rathouz, & Leventhal, 2007; 
Le Grange, Lock, Agras, Bryson, & Jo, 2015; Lock, 
2015). FBT-BN is similar to the FBT treatment for 
youth with AN, but with a stronger emphasis in 
Phase 1 on regulating eating and eliminating binge 
eating and purging as opposed to weight restoration. 
Further, the adolescent maintains some control over 
their eating in addition to parental involvement, 
instead of complete control over eating put in the 
parents' hands. Compared with supportive psycho-
therapy for adolescents with BN, Le Grange et al. 
(2007) found FBT-BN to be superior on abstinence 
from binge eating and purging at posttreatment and 
a 6-month follow-up. Further, FBT-BN more rapidly 
reduced core bulimic symptoms compared with sup-
portive psychotherapy. Additionally, Le Grange et al. 
(2015) compared FBT-BN and CBT for adolescents 
(CBT-A) for the treatment of adolescent BN. FBT-BN 
showed short-term superiority and brought about 
higher binge eating and purging abstinence rates at 
the end of treatment and a 6-month follow-up;  
however, abstinence rates did not differ between 
treatment groups at a 12-month follow-up.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy guided self-

help. 
CBT guided self-help (CBTgsh) has also 
been identified as a possibly efficacious treatment for 
youth with BN (Lock, 2015; Schmidt & Treasure, 
1997). CBTgsh is a workbook-based psychosocial 
intervention that was adapted from a self-help treat-
ment for adult patients with BN (Schmidt & Treasure, 
1997). The therapist and patient meet weekly, with 
the therapist's role being to motivate the patient and 
guide him or her through the workbook. CBTgsh 
establishes patient motivation to change in the begin-
ning of treatment and focuses on the function of BN 
in the patient's life. Thoughts, feelings, and behaviors 
are self-monitored to illuminate to the patient the 
patterns that emerge between these constructs and 
how their ED symptoms are maintained. Patients 
are tasked with problem solving through behavioral 
experiments and goal setting to help recognize and 
intervene in the vicious cycle of binge eating and 
compensatory behaviors. Homework is regularly 
assigned throughout treatment, and follow-up ses-
sions occur after the core weekly sessions to give 
attention to relapse prevention. Schmidt et al. (2007) 
compared the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of 
FBT-BN and CBTgsh in adolescents with BN. At the 
end of treatment, CBTgsh produced significantly 
greater reductions in binge eating; however, treatment 
effects were comparable at a 6-month follow-up. No 
other treatment group differences emerged. One nota-
ble advantage of CBTgsh was the lower direct cost 
compared with FBT-BN.
supportive psychotherapy. 
Supportive psycho-
therapy has been identified as an experimental treat-
ment for youth with BN (Lock, 2015). Supportive 
psychotherapy was designed as a comparison condi-
tion for FBT-BN and was intentionally designed to 
have no overlap with cognitive-behavioral, interper-
sonal, or analytic therapy (Le Grange et al., 2007). 
Phase 1 of this treatment seeks to establish a strong 
therapeutic alliance, gather personal and family his-
tory, and understand the development and course 
of the ED. The patient is also encouraged to identify 
underlying issues that might have contributed to the 
Eating Disorders in Children and Adolescents
357
start and maintenance of the illness. Phase 2 empha-
sizes emotional problems and encourages the patient 
to express his or her feelings. To foster indepen-
dence and empowerment, the patient is responsible 
for generating topics for discussion during sessions. 
During Phase 3, important discoveries from the 
initial phases are reviewed, including underlying 
issues that maintain disordered eating symptoms. 
The patient and therapist discuss how these issues 
continue to impact the patient's journey toward ED 
recovery and how he or she might address similar 
problems if they arise in the future. Although Le 
Grange et al. (2007) found FBT-BN to be superior to 
supportive psychotherapy, the treatment produced 
improvements in binge eating and purging episodes 
and ED psychopathology.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy. 
CBT is an experi-
mental treatment for youth with BN, with encourag-
ing preliminary results. As previously mentioned, 
CBT-A was implemented in a recent RCT (Le 
Grange et al., 2015). CBT-A was derived from the 
Fairburn and colleagues CBT for adult BN treatment 
manual (Fairburn, Marcus, & Wilson, 1993) and 
follows three treatment phases. Significant treatment 
modifications from CBT for adult BN include an 
initial focus on therapeutic alliance as demonstrated 
through increased contact with a therapist; conjoint 
sessions with parents to provide psychoeducation 
about BN and foster their support of the treatment; 
use of concrete examples; and exploration of devel-
opmental issues (e.g., autonomy) in the context of 
BN (Le Grange et al., 2015). Le Grange et al. (2015) 
found FBT-BN was superior to CBT-A in the short-
term, but treatment effects were indistinguishable at 
a 12-month follow-up. Further, CBT-A precipitated 
significant reductions in binge eating and purging 
rates (Le Grange et al., 2015).
Binge Eating Disorder
To date, there is a notable paucity of RCTs and 
treatment research conducted among youth with 
BED (Lock, 2015). One possibly efficacious and 
two experimental treatments have been identified, 
although more research in this area is warranted.
internet-facilitated cognitive-behavioral therapy- 

self-help. 
Internet-facilitated CBT-self-help  
has been identified as a possibly efficacious treat-
ment for youth with BED (Jones et al., 2008; Lock, 
2015). Jones et al. (2008) investigated an Internet-
facilitated CBT-self-help intervention for binge 
eating and weight maintenance in adolescents. The 
intervention combined psychoeducation and behav-
ioral interventions, including self-monitoring, goal 
setting, stimulus control, and appetite awareness, as 
well as introduced emotion regulation skills. Weekly 
letters were sent to participants to reinforce partici-
pation, and the program included an asynchronous 
moderated discussion group. Those who received 
the Internet-facilitated intervention had signifi-
cantly lower BMI 
z
 scores and BMI from baseline to 
follow-up, compared with the waitlist control group. 
Further, those randomized to the Internet-facilitated 
intervention had significant reductions in objective 
binge episodes, subjective binge episodes, and weight 
and shape concerns from baseline to posttreatment 
and from baseline to follow-up.
Relatedly, DeBar et al. (2013) conducted a pilot 
study of an in-person CBT group in a sample of 
adolescents who reported current binge eating with 
or without compensatory behaviors. Participants 
randomized to the CBT group reported significantly 
fewer binge eating episodes at posttreatment com-
pared with those in the treatment-as-usual/delayed 
treatment control group. Additional studies regard-
ing the efficacy of in-person CBT for youth with 
BED are needed.
interpersonal psychotherapy. 
Interpersonal psy-
chotherapy (IPT) is an experimental treatment for 
youth with BED (Lock, 2015; Tanofsky-Kraff et al., 
2010, 2014). IPT for the prevention of weight gain 
(IPT-WG; Tanofsky-Kraff et al., 2010) was adapted 
from the IPT-Adolescent Skills Training manual for 
the prevention of depression (Young & Mufson, 
2003) and IPT for the treatment of adult BED 
(Wilfley, MacKenzie, Welch, Ayres, & Weissman, 
2000). At the beginning of treatment, the youth's 
symptoms are conceptualized in one of four prob-
lems areas: interpersonal deficits, interpersonal role 
disputes, role transitions, or grief. IPT-WG consists 
of three phases. Phase 1 emphasizes psychoeduca-
tion, provides the theoretical rationale for the treat-
ment approach, and develops rapport between group 
Fitzsimmons-Craft, Karam, and Wilfley
358
members. Phase 2 is marked by fostering interper-
sonal skills that can be applied to different relation-
ships within the youth's identified interpersonal 
problem area, and group members are encouraged to 
share personal relationship experience and develop 
improved communication. In Phase 3, group mem-
bers prepare to terminate and plan to work on 
future goals. A hallmark feature of the treatment 
is to continually link episodes of LOC eating and 
overeating to the maladaptive interpersonal con-
text, which has contributed to and helps maintain 
symptoms (Tanofsky-Kraff et al., 2010). In a pilot 
study with adolescent girls at-risk for excess weight 
gain with and without LOC eating, Tanofsky-Kraff 
et al. (2010) compared IPT-WG with a standard-
of-care health education group. IPT-WG produced 
significantly greater reductions in LOC eating 
than the health education group (Tanofsky-Kraff 
et al., 2010). In a more adequately powered RCT, 
Tanofsky-Kraff et al. (2014) compared IPT-WG with 
a health education group among adolescent girls 
at high risk of obesity and EDs based on BMI and 
reported LOC eating. Both groups had significant 
reductions in expected BMI gain, percent of body 
fat, symptoms of depression and anxiety, and LOC 
eating frequency over a 12-month follow-up, but 
IPT-WG was more efficacious than health education 
at reducing objective binge eating at a 12-month 
follow-up (Tanofsky-Kraff et al., 2014).
Dialectical behavioral therapy. 
Safer, Couturier, 
and Lock (2007) developed an adolescent-specific 
version of dialectical behavioral therapy (DBT) for 
the treatment of BED. Results of the case report 
provide preliminary support that DBT may be a 
therapeutic option for adolescents with BED, mak-
ing it an experimental treatment, but it must be 
systemically studied further. The adapted DBT for 
adolescent BED was modeled heavily after DBT for 
BED in adults, with some important modifications 
(e.g., meeting conjointly with patient and parents in 
the first part of the initial session). In this adapted 
treatment, the first half of every session reviews the 
patient's practice of DBT skills and behavioral chain 
analysis from the prior week, with the remainder of 
the session spent focusing on the acquisition of new 
skills. The behavior chain analysis is a key tool used 
throughout treatment to thoroughly analyze a prob-
lematic eating behavior, examine what triggered the 
episode, identify factors that made the adolescent 
especially vulnerable, review the behavioral "steps" 
(or "links" of the chain) that led to the episode, and 
generate behaviors the patient could do in the future 
to replace the problematic eating behavior. If the 
patient identifies parental interactions as a key link 
in the behavioral chain, parents are invited to join 
treatment for a family session. The use and consis-
tency of family sessions depends on the individual 
adolescent. Skills covered in treatment include dis-
tress tolerance, mindfulness, emotion regulation, 
and interpersonal effectiveness.
Early treatment for Eating Disorders
Notably, long-term outcome data have consistently 
illuminated the benefit of early treatment for EDs. 
Shorter latency between onset and start of treatment 
is associated with better outcomes, and likewise, 
longer duration is associated with lower remis-
sion rates (Loeb, Craigen, Goldstein, Lock, & Le 
Grange, 2011). Further, untreated EDs tend to take 
a more chronic and debilitating course (Lewinsohn, 
Striegel-Moore, & Seeley, 2000). These findings 
highlight that seeking treatment early in ED onset 
is critical. As such, eating pathology in children 
and adolescents should not go ignored, and these 
problems should be treated as quickly as possible to 
ensure the greatest chance at lasting recovery.
PharmaCologiCal intErvEntions 

For Eating DisorDErs
To date, there is a lack of scientific data to document 
an evidence-based pharmacological treatment for 
children and adolescents with EDs, and there are 
currently no FDA-approved pharmacological treat-
ments for youth with these problems (Powers & 
Cloak, 2012). Treatment guidelines suggest psycho-
social and medical interventions should be the first 
line of treatment for this patient population (van 
den Heuvel & Jordaan, 2014), and weight restora-
tion should be addressed first in underweight indi-
viduals (Reinblatt, Redgrave, & Guarda, 2008). It is 
recommended that medication only be prescribed 
prudently and with thorough consideration given 
Eating Disorders in Children and Adolescents
359
the lack of empirical support in this area (van den 
Heuvel & Jordaan, 2014).
Research on pharmacological treatment for 
youth with AN has mostly investigated atypical 
antipsychotics (e.g., olanzapine, quetiapine) and 
antidepressants (e.g., fluoxetine; van den Heuvel & 
Jordaan, 2014). A case series review evaluated 
the use of atypical antipsychotics in this patient 
population, and concluded that they generally have 
beneficial effects on psychopathology (e.g., anxi-
ety and rigidity) with limited negative side effects, 
but that further research is needed (Mehler-Wex, 
Romanos, Kirchheiner, & Schulze, 2008). Like-
wise, in a retrospective naturalistic study of youth 
with AN, the use of medication (mostly antidepres-
sants) was associated with improvements in ED 
behaviors, weight, mood, and obsessive symptoms 
with limited adverse effects (Rossi et al., 2007). 
However, other studies have found no benefit of 
adding an antidepressant to psychological treat-
ment for adolescents with AN (Attia, Haiman, 
Walsh, & Flater, 1998; Holtkamp et al., 2005; Kaye 
et al., 2001). Currently there is no clear evidence 
to recommend the addition of medication to psy-
chological interventions in treating youth with AN, 
except in cases where pharmacotherapy is used 
to treat comorbid conditions (Aigner, Treasure, 
Kaye, & Kasper, 2011).
Few studies have formally investigated phar-
macotherapy in youth with BN, but one study 
found that the addition of 60 mg of fluoxetine to 
supportive psychotherapy in an open trial led to 
significantly decreased binge eating and purging 
episodes and was well tolerated (Kotler, Devlin, 
Davies, & Walsh, 2003). Although fluoxetine is not 
FDA-approved to treat youth with BN, it is approved 
for use with adults with BN and is FDA-approved 
to treat depression and OCD in youth. Despite the 
dearth of evidence, taken together, these results and 
the relatively robust evidence for using fluoxetine 
in the treatment of adult BN (Powers & Cloak, 
2012), fluoxetine as part of a multimodal treatment 
plan in patients with significant comorbid mood 
symptoms or in psychotherapy nonresponders may 
be judiciously considered (Mitchell, Roerig, & 
Steffen, 2013; van den Heuvel & Jordaan, 2014). 
To date no studies have systematically evaluated 
pharmacotherapy for BED in children and adoles-
cents (van den Heuvel & Jordaan, 2014).
PrEDiCtors anD moDErators oF 

trEatmEnt rEsPonsE
A few key treatment response predictors have been 
identified for youth with EDs. First, parental criti-
cism of the youth with AN can adversely affect the 
family's ability to remain in treatment and overall 
treatment outcomes (Eisler et al., 2000; Le Grange 
et al., 1992). High levels of expressed emotion, a 
marker of parental criticism, in mothers predicted 
early dropout from family therapy but not from 
individual treatment (Szmukler, Eisler, Russell, & 
Dare, 1985). Conversely, parental warmth increased 
the likelihood of a better treatment outcome for 
adolescents with AN (Le Grange, Hoste, Lock, & 
Bryson, 2011). Given these findings, it is of the 
utmost important to address family criticism during 
therapy sessions, and therapists should attempt to 
facilitate family warmth by eliciting empathy from 
family members. Furthermore, adolescents with AN 
who come from highly critical families may benefit 
from separated family therapy (Le Grange et al., 
1992). Second, early weight gain in AN treatment 
may be a critical indicator of short- and long-term 
treatment outcomes, as rapid response to treat-
ment, indicated by a weight gain of approximately 
2kg by Session 4, was a strong predictor of attain-
ing recovery by the end of FBT (Doyle, Le Grange, 
Loeb, Doyle, & Crosby, 2010). Further, Lock et al. 
(2013) found that reaching 95% of expected BMI by 
the end of FBT was a strong predictor of recovery at 
long-term follow-up. These findings highlight the 
importance of fostering early change among youth 
with AN. Third, brief duration of illness and earlier 
age of onset may be important predictors of treat-
ment response, with Agras et al. (2014) finding that 
such patients gained more weight in two forms of 
family treatment.
Several treatment moderators have been identi-
fied for youth with AN. Moderators identify which 
psychosocial intervention works best for whom 
or under what circumstances (Kraemer, Wil-
son, Fairburn, & Agras, 2002). Le Grange et al. 
(2012) found that having higher eating-related 
Fitzsimmons-Craft, Karam, and Wilfley
360
obsessionality or global ED pathology predicted 
patients benefitting more from FBT rather than 
AFT, and Agras et al. (2014) found that individu-
als with greater obsessive-compulsive symptoms 
gained significantly more weight with systemic 
family therapy compared with FBT by the end of 
treatment. Finally, in their recent RCT for youth 
with AN comparing FBT and PFT, Le Grange et al. 
(2016) found no moderators for end of treatment 
outcome. However, dietary restraint, eating concern, 
shape concern, global ED psychopathology, eating-
related obsessive-compulsive features, and duration 
of illness were moderators of treatment effect at 
12-month follow-up. Individuals with elevated ED-
related obsessions and compulsions did better in 
FBT, but those with lower scores on these measures 
did markedly better in PFT.
Le Grange, Crosby, and Lock (2008) evaluated 
predictors and moderators of treatment outcome for 
adolescents with BN who participated in FBT-BN or 
individual supportive psychotherapy. Participants 
with less severe eating concerns at baseline were 
more likely to have remitted after treatment and at 
follow-up, regardless of treatment received. Adoles-
cents with lower depressive symptoms at baseline 
were more likely to be partially remitted after treat-
ment. In terms of moderators, participants with less 
severe global ED psychopathology receiving FBT-BN 
were more likely to be partially remitted at follow-
up, suggesting that FBT-BN may be most helpful for 
individuals with less severe ED pathology (Le Grange 
et al., 2008). Furthermore, Le Grange et al.'s (2015) 
RCT for adolescent BN identified family environ-
ment conflict as a treatment effect moderator, such 
that those with less conflict responded better to FBT-
BN compared with CBT-A. This study also found 
that boys, individuals with lower eating-related 
obsessionality, and individuals reporting higher fam-
ily cohesion all showed better ED abstinence rates at 
the end of treatment (Le Grange et al., 2015).
PrEvEntion
ED prevention involves the reduction or elimina-
tion of key, modifiable risk factors for EDs and/or 
the promotion of factors that are protective against 
EDs and can be done at multiple levels: individual, 
family, group, institutional, community, or societal 
(Neumark-Sztainer, 2011). Further, prevention 
efforts can be divided into two main types: primary 
prevention, which targets the whole population 
with the aim to prevent the onset of an ED before 
any sign of the disorder occurs, and secondary pre-
vention, which targets individuals at high risk of 
developing an ED who are already starting to show 
symptoms and includes early identification and 
intervention to prevent the occurrence of a full-
blown ED.
Most prevention programs for youth have been 
implemented at the school level, which provides easy 
access to children of diverse backgrounds. Several 
reviews have been conducted on the effectiveness 
of ED prevention programming, with findings sug-
gesting that these programs have modest success 
in decreasing risk factors and increasing protective 
factors and that further work is needed to improve 
program effectiveness (e.g., Holt & Ricciardelli, 2008; 
Pratt & Woolfenden, 2002; Stice, Shaw, & Marti, 
2007). Larger effects are found for programs that are 
secondary (vs. primary) prevention, interactive (vs. 
didactic), multisession (vs. single session), offered to 
only girls (vs. co-ed), offered to participants over age 
15 (vs. younger participants), and delivered by pro-
fessional interventionists (vs. endogenous providers; 
Stice et al., 2007). Furthermore, a recent systematic 
review indicated that a small number of prevention 
studies including parents have led to reductions in 
ED risk factors, suggesting that it may be of value to 
determine how to creatively and effectively engage 
parents in future prevention efforts (Hart, Cornell, 
Damiano, & Paxton, 2015).
Importantly, the availability and use of comput-
ers, the Internet, and mobile phones has expanded 
tremendously in recent years. In 2015, over 90% 
of teens ages 13 to 17 reported going online daily, 
including 24% who reported being online "almost 
constantly" (Lenhart, 2015). There is great poten-
tial for the Internet to serve as a vehicle to provide 
psychological interventions (Kendall, Carper, 
Khanna, & Harris, 2015), including programs to 
prevent EDs. Using the Internet for intervention 
has numerous purported benefits including lack 
of geographic boundaries, allowing for widespread 
dissemination and the ability to reach individuals 
Eating Disorders in Children and Adolescents
361
who may otherwise have limited access to preven-
tion programming; easily accessible from anywhere 
at any time; cost and time efficient; anonymity; and 
high user acceptability (Aardoom, Dingemans, Spin-
hoven, & Van Furth, 2013). Research indicates that 
Internet-based prevention programs can effectively 
decrease ED risk factors in youth (e.g., My Body, 
My Life, [Heinicke, Paxton, McLean, & Wertheim, 
2007]; Student Bodies [Abascal, Brown, Winzel-
berg, Dev, & Taylor, 2004]), and the Internet is 
increasingly being used for intervention as well. For 
example, Aardoom et al. (2016) found that a fully 
automated Internet-based self-monitoring and feed-
back intervention was effective in reducing ED and 
comorbid psychopathology among youth 16 years 
and older with self-reported ED symptoms. The 
Internet and mobile technology holds great promise 
for the ED intervention in youth, but a challenge is 
keeping up with technology and user preferences.
FuturE DirECtions
In recent decades, the evidence base for understand-
ing and treating youth with EDs has increased dra-
matically. However, there are still too few treatment 
studies to provide sufficient understanding. Further, 
AN has received most of the empirical attention, 
leaving a plethora of unanswered questions particu-
larly when it comes to treating youth with BN, BED, 
and other EDs.
Additionally, although it is important to con-
tinue to examine and improve interventions for 
youth with EDs, the next imperative step is to 
disseminate and implement these evidence-based 
treatments into community and clinical settings. 
Indeed, a major barrier to effectively treating youth 
with EDs is the lack of adoption of evidence-based 
interventions in settings in which these patients 
are usually seen (Novins, Green, Legha, & Aarons, 
2013). Dissemination and implementation science is 
a burgeoning field that seeks to distribute materials 
and information to a clinical practice audience with 
the goal of increasing the routine use of evidence-
based care (Novins et al., 2013). Given the limited 
nature of the literature on treatments for youth EDs 
and the relatively new field of dissemination and 
implementation science, it is unsurprising that there 
is a dearth of studies in this area. There are prelimi-
nary findings to support that it may be possible to 
disseminate FBT (Couturier, Isserlin, & Lock, 2010; 
Loeb et al., 2007); however, treatment fidelity has 
been largely unexplored. The use of online plat-
forms that are widely accessible will be an important 
strategy both for innovative treatment, as well as 
a method of training clinicians in empirically sup-
ported approaches (Fairburn & Patel, 2014). Mov-
ing forward, it will be important to identify barriers 
to uptake of evidence-based practices and to evalu-
ate effective strategies for training clinicians in these 
approaches (Lock, 2015).
ConClusion
EDs are serious mental health problems with com-
plex etiologies and are associated with high medical 
and psychiatric comorbidity, poor quality of life, 
and high mortality. Mortality from AN is the highest 
of all mental disorders. Effective prevention, early 
recognition, and treatment is needed to prevent 
these devastating illnesses, complications, and a 
chronic course. Family involvement is typically rec-
ommended in the assessment and treatment of EDs 
in children and adolescents, and to date, FBT for AN 
is the only well-established treatment for any youth 
ED. Future research is needed to identify other well-
established treatments. Further, the development 
and examination of dissemination and implementa-
tion strategies is a critical next step to enhance qual-
ity of care for youth with EDs by effectively training 
usual-care clinicians in evidence-based treatments.
references
Aardoom, J. J., Dingemans, A. E., Spinhoven, P., &  
Van Furth, E. F. (2013). Treating eating disorders over 
the internet: A systematic review and future research 
directions. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
46
, 
539-552. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.22135
Aardoom, J. J., Dingemans, A. E., Spinhoven, P.,  
van Ginkel, J. R., de Rooij, M., & van Furth, E. F. 
(2016). Web-based fully automated self-help with 
different levels of therapist support for individuals 
with eating disorder symptoms: A randomized 
controlled trial. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research
, 
18
, e159. http://dx.doi.org/10.2196/jmir.5709
Abascal, L., Brown, J. B., Winzelberg, A. J., Dev, P., & 
Taylor, C. B. (2004). Combining universal and 
Fitzsimmons-Craft, Karam, and Wilfley
362
targeted prevention for school-based eating disorder 
programs. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
35
, 1-9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.10234
Agras, W. S., Lock, J., Brandt, H., Bryson, S. W., 
Dodge, E., Halmi, K. A., . . . Woodside, B. (2014). 
Comparison of two family therapies for adolescent 
anorexia nervosa: A randomized parallel trial. 
JAMA 
Psychiatry
, 
71
, 1279-1286. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jamapsychiatry.2014.1025
Aigner, M., Treasure, J., Kaye, W., & Kasper, S. (2011). 
World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry 
(WFSBP) guidelines for the pharmacological 
treatment of eating disorders. 
World Journal of 
Biological Psychiatry
, 
12
, 400-443. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3109/15622975.2011.602720
Allen, K. L., Byrne, S. M., Oddy, W. H., & Crosby, R. D. 
(2013). 
DSM-IV-TR
 and 
DSM-5
 eating disorders in 
adolescents: Prevalence, stability, and psychosocial 
correlates in a population-based sample of male and 
female adolescents. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology
, 
122
, 720-732. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0034004
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). 
Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders
 (4th ed., text 
revision). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2006). Treatment 
of patients with eating disorders, third edition. 
American Journal of Psychiatry
, 
163
(Suppl.), 4-54.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). 
Diagnostic 
and statistical manual of mental disorders
 (5th ed.). 
Washington, DC: Author.
Atiye, M., Miettunen, J., & Raevuori-Helkamaa, A. 
(2015). A meta-analysis of temperament in eating 
disorders. 
European Eating Disorders Review
, 
23
, 
89-99. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/erv.2342
Attia, E., Haiman, C., Walsh, B. T., & Flater, S. R. (1998). 
Does fluoxetine augment the inpatient treatment of 
anorexia nervosa? 
American Journal of Psychiatry
, 
155
, 
548-551. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/ajp.155.4.548
Baldock, E., & Tchanturia, K. (2007). Translating 
laboratory research into practice: Foundations, 
functions and future of cognitive remediation 
therapy for anorexia nervosa. 
Therapy
, 
4
, 285-292. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2217/14750708.4.3.285
Becker, A. E., Burwell, R. A., Gilman, S. E., Herzog, D. B., &  
Hamburg, P. (2002). Eating behaviours and attitudes 
following prolonged exposure to television among 
ethnic Fijian adolescent girls. 
British Journal of 
Psychiatry
, 
180
, 509-514. http://dx.doi.org/10.1192/
bjp.180.6.509
Becker, A. E., Franko, D. L., Speck, A., & Herzog, D. B. 
(2003). Ethnicity and differential access to care for 
eating disorder symptoms. 
International Journal of 
Eating Disorders
, 
33
, 205-212. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1002/eat.10129
Biederman, J., Ball, S. W., Monuteaux, M. C., Surman, C. B.,  
Johnson, J. L., & Zeitlin, S. (2007). Are girls 
with ADHD at risk for eating disorders? 
Results from a controlled, five-year prospective 
study. 
Journal of Developmental and Behavioral 
Pediatrics
, 
28
, 302-307. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
DBP.0b013e3180327917
Bleck, J. R., DeBate, R. D., & Olivardia, R. (2014). 
The comorbidity of ADHD and eating disorders 
in a nationally representative sample. 
Journal of 
Behavioral Health Services and Research
, 
42
, 437-451. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11414-014-9422-y
Bryant-Waugh, R. J., Cooper, P. J., Taylor, C. L., & 
Lask, B. D. (1996). The use of the eating disorder 
examination with children: A pilot study. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
19
, 
391-397. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1098-
108X(199605)19:4<391::AID-EAT6>3.0.CO;2-G
Buhren, K., Schwarte, R., Fluck, F., Timmesfeld, N., 
Krei, M., Egberts, K., . . . Herpertz-Dahlmann, B. 
(2014). Comorbid psychiatric disorders in female 
adolescents with first-onset anorexia nervosa. 
European Eating Disorders Review
, 
22
, 39-44. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/erv.2254
Bulik, C. M., Marcus, M. D., Zerwas, S., Levine, M. D., & 
La Via, M. (2012). The changing "weightscape" of 
bulimia nervosa. 
American Journal of Psychiatry
, 
169
, 1031-1036. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi.
ajp.2012.12010147
Campbell, K., & Peebles, R. (2014). Eating disorders in 
children and adolescents: State of the art review. 
Pediatrics
, 
134
, 582-592. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/
peds.2014-0194
Childress, A. C., Brewerton, T. D., Hodges, E. L., & 
Jarrell, M. P. (1993). The Kids' Eating Disorders 
Survey (KEDS): A study of middle school students. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry
, 
32
, 843-850. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1097/00004583-199307000-00021
Couturier, J., Isserlin, L., & Lock, J. (2010). Family-based 
treatment for adolescents with anorexia nervosa: A 
dissemination study. 
Eating Disorders
, 
18
, 199-209. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10640261003719443
Couturier, J., Lock, J., Forsberg, S., Vanderheyden, D.,  
& Yen, H. L. (2007). The addition of a parent 
and clinician component to the eating disorder 
examination for children and adolescents. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
40
, 472-475. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.20379
Couturier, J. L., & Lock, J. (2006). Denial and 
minimization in adolescents with anorexia nervosa. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
39
, 212-216. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.20241
Crow, S., & Swigart, S. (2007). Medical assessment. In 
J. E. Mitchell & C. B. Peterson (Eds.), 
Assessment 
Eating Disorders in Children and Adolescents
363
of eating disorders
 (pp. 120-128). New York, NY: 
Guilford Press.
Crowther, J. H., & Sherwood, N. E. (1997). Assessment. 
In D. M. Garner & P. E. Garfinkel (Eds.), 
Handbook 
of treatment for eating disorders
 (2nd ed., pp. 34-49). 
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Currin, L., Schmidt, U., Treasure, J., & Jick, H. (2005). 
Time trends in eating disorder incidence. 
British 
Journal of Psychiatry
, 
186
, 132-135. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjp.186.2.132
Currin, L., Schmidt, U., & Waller, G. (2007). Variables 
that influence diagnosis and treatment of the eating 
disorders within primary care settings: A vignette 
study. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
40
, 
257-262. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.20355
Dahlgren, C. L., Lask, B., Landro, N. I., & Ro, O. (2013). 
Neuropsychological functioning in adolescents 
with anorexia nervosa before and after cognitive 
remediation therapy: A feasibility trial. 
International 
Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
46
, 576-581. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.22155
Dalle Grave, R., Calugi, S., Doll, H. A., & Fairburn, C. G. 
(2013). Enhanced cognitive-behaviour therapy for 
adolescents with anorexia nervosa: An alternative to 
family therapy? 
Behaviour Research and Therapy
, 
51
, 
R9-R12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2012.09.008
DeBar, L. L., Wilson, G. T., Yarborough, B. J., Burns, B., 
Oyler, B., Hildebrandt, T., . . . Striegel, R. H. (2013). 
Cognitive-behavioral treatment for recurrent binge 
eating in adolescent girls: A pilot trial. 
Cognitive and 
Behavioral Practice
, 
20
, 147-161. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.cbpra.2012.04.001
Doyle, P. M., Le Grange, D., Loeb, K., Doyle, A. C., & 
Crosby, R. D. (2010). Early response to family-
based treatment for adolescent anorexia nervosa. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
43
, 659-662. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.20764
Eisenberg, M. E., & Neumark-Sztainer, D. (2010). 
Friends' dieting and disordered eating behaviors 
among adolescents five years later: Findings from 
Project EAT. 
Journal of Adolescent Health
, 
47,
 67-73. 
http://dx.doi.org/10:1016/j.jadohealth.2009.12.030
Eisler, I., Dare, C., Hodes, M., Russell, G., Dodge, E., & 
Le Grange, D. (2000). Family therapy for adolescent 
anorexia nervosa: The results of a controlled 
comparison of two family interventions. 
Journal of 
Child Psychology and Psychiatry
, 
41
, 727-736. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/1469-7610.00660
Fairburn, C. G. (2008). 
Cognitive-behavioral therapy and 
eating disorders
. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Fairburn, C. G., & Beglin, S. J. (1994). Assessment 
of eating disorders: Interview or self-report 
questionnaire? 
International Journal of Eating 
Disorders
, 
16
, 363-370.
Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., Doll, H. A., Norman, P., & 
O'Connor, M. (2000). The natural course of bulimia 
nervosa and binge eating disorder in young women. 
Archives of General Psychiatry
, 
57
, 659-665. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.57.7.659
Fairburn, C. G., Cooper, Z., & O'Connor, M. E. (2008). 
Eating disorder examination. In C. G. Fairburn 
(Ed.), 
Cognitive-behavior therapy and eating disorders
(12th ed., pp. 265-308). New York, NY: Guilford 
Press.
Fairburn, C. G., Marcus, M. D., & Wilson, G. T. (1993). 
Cognitive-behaviour therapy for binge eating 
and bulimia nervosa: A comprehensive treatment 
manual. In C. G. Fairburn & G. T. Wilson (Eds.), 
Binge eating: Nature, assessment, and treatment
 (12th 
ed., pp. 361-404). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Fairburn, C. G., & Patel, V. (2014). The global 
dissemination of psychological treatments: A road 
map for research and practice. 
American Journal of 
Psychiatry
, 
171
, 495-498. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/
appi.ajp.2013.13111546
Fairweather-Schmidt, A. K., & Wade, T. D. (2014). 
DSM-5
 eating disorders and other specified eating 
and feeding disorders: Is there a meaningful 
differentiation? 
International Journal of Eating 
Disorders
, 
47
, 524-533. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
eat.22257
Fichter, M. M., Herpertz, S., Quadflieg, N., & Herpertz-
Dahlmann, B. (1998). Structured Interview 
for Anorexic and Bulimic disorders for 
DSM-IV
 and ICD-10: Updated (third) revision. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
24
, 
227-249. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1098-
108X(199811)24:3<227::AID-EAT1>3.0.CO;2-O
Fichter, M. M., & Quadflieg, N. (2004). Twelve-
year course and outcome of bulimia nervosa. 
Psychological Medicine
, 
34
, 1395-1406. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0033291704002673
Forbush, K. T., Wildes, J. E., Pollack, L. O., Dunbar, D.,  
Luo, J., Patterson, K., . . . Watson, D. (2013). 
Development and validation of the Eating Pathology 
Symptoms Inventory (EPSI). 
Psychological 
Assessment
, 
25
, 859-878. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
a0032639
Garner, D. M. (1991). 
The eating disorder inventory--c
. 
Lutz, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Garner, D. M., Olmstead, M. P., Bohr, Y., & Garfinkel, P. E.  
(1982). The eating attitudes test: Psychometric 
features and clinical correlates. 
Psychological 
Medicine
, 
12
, 871-878. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
S0033291700049163
Garner, D. M., Olmstead, M. P., & Polivy, J. (1983). 
Development and validation of a multidimensional 
eating disorder inventory for anorexia nervosa  
and bulimia. 
International Journal of Eating  
Fitzsimmons-Craft, Karam, and Wilfley
364
Disorders
, 
2
, 15-34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ 
1098-108X(198321)2:2<15::AID-
EAT2260020203>3.0.CO;2-6
Geist, R., Heinmaa, M., Stephens, D., Davis, R., & 
Katzman, D. K. (2000). Comparison of family 
therapy and family group psychoeducation in 
adolescents with anorexia nervosa. 
Canadian Journal 
of Psychiatry
, 
45
, 173-178.
Gilbert, S. C. (2003). Eating disorders in women of 
color. 
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice
, 
10
, 
444-455. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/clipsy.bpg045
Godart, N., Berthoz, S., Curt, F., Perdereau, F., Rein, Z., 
Wallier, J., . . . Jeammet, P. (2012). A randomized 
controlled trial of adjunctive family therapy and 
treatment as usual following inpatient treatment for 
anorexia nervosa adolescents. 
PLOS ONE
, 
7
, e28249. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0028249
Goldschmidt, A. B., Doyle, A. C., & Wilfley, D. E. 
(2007). Assessment of binge eating in overweight 
youth using a questionnaire version of the Child 
Eating Disorder Examination with instructions. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
40
, 460-467. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.20387
Gowers, S. G., Clark, A., Roberts, C., Griffiths, A., 
Edwards, V., Bryan, C., . . . Barrett, B. (2007). 
Clinical effectiveness of treatments for anorexia 
nervosa in adolescents: Randomised controlled trial. 
British Journal of Psychiatry
, 
191
, 427-435. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.107.036764
Halmi, K. A., Casper, R. C., Eckert, E. D., Goldberg, S. 
C., & Davis, J. M. (1979). Unique features associated 
with age of onset of anorexia nervosa. 
Psychiatry 
Research
, 
1
, 209-215. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1016/0165-1781(79)90063-5
Hart, L. M., Cornell, C., Damiano, S. R., & Paxton, S. 
J. (2015). Parents and prevention: A systematic 
review of interventions involving parents that aim 
to prevent body dissatisfaction or eating disorders. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
48
, 157-169. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.22284
Heinicke, B. E., Paxton, S. J., McLean, S. A., & Wertheim, 
E. H. (2007). Internet-delivered targeted group 
intervention for body dissatisfaction and disordered 
eating in adolescent girls: A randomized controlled 
trial. 
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology
, 
35
, 379-391. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10802-006-9097-9
Herpertz-Dahlmann, B. (2009). Adolescent eating 
disorders: Definitions, symptomatology, 
epidemiology and comorbidity. 
Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatric Clinics of North America
, 
18
, 31-47. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chc.2008.07.005
Hilbert, A., Pike, K. M., Goldschmidt, A. B., Wilfley, D. E.,  
Fairburn, C. G., Dohm, F. A., . . . Striegel Weissman, R.  
(2014). Risk factors across the eating disorders. 
Psychiatry Research
, 
220
, 500-506. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.psychres.2014.05.054
Holt, K. E., & Ricciardelli, L. A. (2008). Weight concerns 
among elementary school children: A review of 
prevention programs. 
Body Image
, 
5
, 233-243. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bodyim.2008.02.002
Holtkamp, K., Konrad, K., Kaiser, N., Ploenes, Y., Heussen, 
N., Grzella, I., & Herpertz-Dahlmann, B. (2005). A 
retrospective study of SSRI treatment in adolescent 
anorexia nervosa: Insufficient evidence for efficacy. 
Journal of Psychiatric Research
, 
39
, 303-310. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2004.08.001
Jacobi, C., Hayward, C., de Zwaan, M., Kraemer, H. C.,  
& Agras, W. S. (2004). Coming to terms with risk 
factors for eating disorders: Application of risk 
terminology and suggestions for a general taxonomy. 
Psychological Bulletin
, 
130
, 19-65. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1037/0033-2909.130.1.19
Johnson, W. G., Grieve, F. G., Adams, C. D., & Sandy, J.  
(1999). Measuring binge eating in adolescents: 
Adolescent and parent versions of the 
questionnaire of eating and weight patterns. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
26
, 
301-314. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1098-
108X(199911)26:3<301::AID-EAT8>3.0.CO;2-M
Jones, M., Luce, K. H., Osborne, M. I., Taylor, K., 
Cunning, D., Doyle, A. C., . . . Taylor, C. B. (2008). 
Randomized, controlled trial of an internet-
facilitated intervention for reducing binge eating and 
overweight in adolescents. 
Pediatrics,
121
, 453-462. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1542
=
peds.2007-1173
Kaufman, J., Birmaher, B., Brent, D., Rao, U., Flynn, C.,  
Moreci, P., . . . Ryan, N. (1997). Schedule for 
Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School-
Age Children--Present and Lifetime Version 
(K-SADS-PL): Initial reliability and validity data. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry
, 
36
, 980-988. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1097/00004583-199707000-00021
Kaye, W. H., Bulik, C. M., Thornton, L., Barbarich, N., & 
Masters, K. (2004). Comorbidity of anxiety disorders 
with anorexia and bulimia nervosa. 
American  
Journal of Psychiatry
, 
161
, 2215-2221. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.161.12.2215
Kaye, W. H., Nagata, T., Weltzin, T. E., Hsu, L. K.,  
Sokol, M. S., McConaha, C., . . . Deep, D. (2001). 
Double-blind placebo-controlled administration of 
fluoxetine in restricting- and restricting-purging-type 
anorexia nervosa. 
Biological Psychiatry
, 
49
, 644-652. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0006-3223(00)01013-1
Kaye, W. H., Wierenga, C. E., Bailer, U. F., Simmons, A. 
N., & Bischoff-Grethe, A. (2013). Nothing tastes as 
good as skinny feels: The neurobiology of anorexia 
nervosa. 
Trends in Neurosciences
, 
36
, 110-120. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2013.01.003
Eating Disorders in Children and Adolescents
365
Keel, P. K., Dorer, D. J., Eddy, K. T., Franko, D., 
Charatan, D. L., & Herzog, D. B. (2003). Predictors 
of mortality in eating disorders. 
Archives of General 
Psychiatry
, 
60
, 179-183. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archpsyc.60.2.179
Keel, P. K., & Forney, K. J. (2013). Psychosocial risk 
factors for eating disorders. 
International Journal of 
Eating Disorders
, 
46
, 433-439. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1002/eat.22094
Keel, P. K., & Haedt, A. (2008). Evidence-based 
psychosocial treatments for eating problems and 
eating disorders. 
Journal of Clinical Child and 
Adolescent Psychology
, 
37
, 39-61. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1080/15374410701817832
Kendall, P. C., Carper, M. M., Khanna, M. S., & Harris, M. S.  
(2015). Computer technology and children's mental 
health. In R. Scott & S. Kosslyn (Eds.), 
Emerging 
trends in the social and behavioral sciences
. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781118900772.etrds0049
Keski-Rahkonen, A., Hoek, H. W., Linna, M. S., Raevuori, A.,  
Sihvola, E., Bulik, C. M., . . . Kaprio, J. (2009). 
Incidence and outcomes of bulimia nervosa: A 
nationwide population-based study. 
Psychological 
Medicine
, 
39
, 823-831. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
S0033291708003942
Keski-Rahkonen, A., Hoek, H. W., Susser, E. S., Linna, M. S.,  
Sihvola, E., Raevuori, A., . . . Rissanen, A. (2007). 
Epidemiology and course of anorexia nervosa in  
the community. 
American Journal of Psychiatry
,  
164
, 1259-1265. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/ 
appi.ajp.2007.06081388
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P. A., Chiu, W. T., Deitz, A. C., 
Hudson, J. I., Shahly, V., . . . Xavier, M. (2013). The 
prevalence and correlates of binge eating disorder in 
the World Health Organization World Mental Health 
Surveys. 
Biological Psychiatry
, 
73
, 904-914. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.11.020
Killen, J. D., Taylor, C. B., Hayward, C., Haydel, K. F., 
Wilson, D. M., Hammer, L., . . . Strachowski, D. 
(1996). Weight concerns influence the development 
of eating disorders: A 4-year prospective study. 
Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
, 
64
, 936-940. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.64.5.936
Klump, K. L., Bulik, C. M., Kaye, W. H., Treasure, J., & 
Tyson, E. (2009). Academy for eating disorders 
position paper: Eating disorders are serious mental 
illnesses. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
42
, 
97-103. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.20589
Kotler, L. A., Devlin, M. J., Davies, M., & Walsh, B. T. 
(2003). An open trial of fluoxetine for adolescents 
with bulimia nervosa. 
Journal of Child and Adolescent 
Psychopharmacology
, 
13
, 329-335. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1089/104454603322572660
Kraemer, H. C., Wilson, G. T., Fairburn, C. G., &  
Agras, W. S. (2002). Mediators and moderators 
of treatment effects in randomized clinical trials. 
Archives of General Psychiatry
, 
59
, 877-883. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.59.10.877
Lahortiga-Ramos, F., De Irala-Estevez, J., Cano-Prous, A.,  
Gual-Garcia, P., Martinez-Gonzalez, M. A., & 
Cervera-Enguix, S. (2005). Incidence of eating 
disorders in Navarra (Spain). 
European Psychiatry
, 
20
, 179-185. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.eurpsy.2004.07.008
Le Grange, D., Crosby, R. D., & Lock, J. (2008). 
Predictors and moderators of outcome in family-
based treatment for adolescent bulimia nervosa. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry
, 
47
, 464-470. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1097/CHI.0b013e3181640816
Le Grange, D., Crosby, R. D., Rathouz, P. J., & Leventhal, 
B. L. (2007). A randomized controlled comparison 
of family-based treatment and supportive 
psychotherapy for adolescent bulimia nervosa. 
Archives of General Psychiatry
, 
64
, 1049-1056. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.64.9.1049
Le Grange, D., Eisler, I., Dare, C., & Russell, G. F. 
(1992). Evaluation of family treatments in adolescent 
anorexia nervosa: A pilot study. 
International Journal 
of Eating Disorders
, 
12
, 347-357. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1002/1098-108X(199212)12:4<347::AID-
EAT2260120402>3.0.CO;2-W
Le Grange, D., Hoste, R. R., Lock, J., & Bryson, S. W. 
(2011). Parental expressed emotion of adolescents 
with anorexia nervosa: Outcome in family-based 
treatment. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
44
, 731-734. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.20877
Le Grange, D., Hughes, E. K., Court, A., Yeo, M., Crosby, 
R. D., & Sawyer, S. M. (2016). Randomized clinical 
trial of parent-focused treatment and family-based 
treatment for adolescent anorexia nervosa. 
Journal 
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry
, 
55
, 683-692. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.jaac.2016.05.007
Le Grange, D., Lock, J., Agras, W. S., Bryson, S. W., & 
Jo, B. (2015). Randomized clinical trial of family-
based treatment and cognitive-behavioral therapy for 
adolescent bulimia nervosa. 
Journal of the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
, 
54
, 
886-942. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2015.08.008
Le Grange, D., Lock, J., Agras, W. S., Moye, A., Bryson, S. W.,  
Jo, B., & Kraemer, H. C. (2012). Moderators and 
mediators of remission in family-based treatment 
and adolescent focused therapy for anorexia nervosa. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy
, 
50
, 85-92. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2011.11.003
Le Grange, D., Lock, J., Loeb, K., & Nicholls, D. (2010). 
Academy for Eating Disorders position paper: The 
role of the family in eating disorders. 
International 
Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
43
, 1-5.
Fitzsimmons-Craft, Karam, and Wilfley
366
Lenhart, A. (2015). 
Teens, social media, and technology 
overview, 2015.
 Retrieved from http://www.
pewinternet.org/2015/04/09/teens-social-media-
technology-2015
Lewinsohn, P. M., Striegel-Moore, R. H., & Seeley, J. R. 
(2000). Epidemiology and natural course of eating 
disorders in young women from adolescence to young 
adulthood. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry
, 
39
, 1284-1292. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1097/00004583-200010000-00016
Lock, J. (2015). An update on evidence-based 
psychosocial treatments for eating disorders in 
children and adolescents. 
Journal of Clinical Child 
and Adolescent Psychology
, 
44
, 707-721. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/15374416.2014.971458
Lock, J., Agras, W. S., Bryson, S., & Kraemer, H. C. 
(2005). A comparison of short- and long-term family 
therapy for adolescent anorexia nervosa. 
Journal 
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry
, 
44
, 632-639. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1097/01.chi.0000161647.82775.0a
Lock, J., Agras, W. S., Le Grange, D., Couturier, J., Safer, D.,  
& Bryson, S. W. (2013). Do end of treatment 
assessments predict outcome at follow-up in eating 
disorders? 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
46
, 771-778. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.22175
Lock, J., & Le Grange, D. (2013). 
Treatment manual for 
anorexia nervosa: A family-based approach
 (2nd ed.). 
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Lock, J., Le Grange, D., Agras, W. S., Moye, A., Bryson, S. W.,  
& Jo, B. (2010). Randomized clinical trial 
comparing family-based treatment with adolescent-
focused individual therapy for adolescents with 
anorexia nervosa. 
Archives of General Psychiatry
, 
67
, 1025-1032. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archgenpsychiatry.2010.128
Loeb, K. L. (2007). 
Eating disorder examination 
questionnaire-parent version (P-EDEQ), version 1.4.
Unpublished measure.
Loeb, K. L. (2008). 
Eating disorder examination-parent 
version (P-EDE), version 1.4.
 Unpublished measure.
Loeb, K. L., Brown, M., & Goldstein, M. M. (2011). 
Assessment of eating disorders in children and 
adolescents. In D. Le Grange & J. Lock (Eds.), 
Eating 
disorders in children and adolescents: A clinical handbook
(pp. 156-198). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Loeb, K. L., Craigen, K. E., Goldstein, M. M., Lock, J., &  
Le Grange, D. (2011). Early treatment for eating 
disorders. In J. Lock & D. Le Grange (Eds.), 
Eating 
disorders in children and adolescents: A clinical handbook
(pp. 337-361). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Loeb, K. L., Walsh, B. T., Lock, J., Le Grange, D., Jones, J.,  
Marcus, S., . . . Dobrow, I. (2007). Open trial of 
family-based treatment for full and partial anorexia 
nervosa in adolescence: Evidence of successful 
dissemination. 
Journal of the American Academy of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
, 
46
, 792-800. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1097/chi.0b013e318058a98e
Madden, S., Miskovic-Wheatley, J., Wallis, A., Kohn, M.,  
Lock, J., Le Grange, D., . . . Touyz, S. (2015). A 
randomized controlled trial of in-patient treatment 
for anorexia nervosa in medically unstable 
adolescents. 
Psychological Medicine
, 
45
, 415-427. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0033291714001573
Maloney, M. J., McGuire, J. B., & Daniels, S. R. (1988). 
Reliability testing of a children's version of the Eating 
Attitude Test. 
Journal of the American Academy of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
, 
27
, 541-543. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1097/00004583-198809000-00004
Marques, L., Alegria, M., Becker, A. E., Chen, C. N.,  
Fang, A., Chosak, A., & Diniz, J. B. (2011). 
Comparative prevalence, correlates of impairment, 
and service utilization for eating disorders across 
U.S. ethnic groups: Implications for reducing ethnic 
disparities in health care access for eating disorders. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
44
, 412-420. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.20787
McAnarney, E. R., Zarcone, J., Singh, P., Michels, J.,  
Welsh, S., Litteer, T., . . . Klein, J. D. (2011). 
Restrictive anorexia nervosa and set-shifting in 
adolescents: A biobehavioral interface. 
Journal of 
Adolescent Health
, 
49
, 99-101. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jadohealth.2010.11.259
Mehler-Wex, C., Romanos, M., Kirchheiner, J., & 
Schulze, U. M. (2008). Atypical antipsychotics 
in severe anorexia nervosa in children and 
adolescents--Review and case reports. 
European 
Eating Disorders Review
, 
16
, 100-108. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1002/erv.843
Micali, N., Hagberg, K. W., Petersen, I., & Treasure, J. L. 
(2013). The incidence of eating disorders in the UK 
in 2000-2009: Findings from the General Practice 
Research Database. 
BMJ Open
, 
3
, e002646. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2013-002646
Micali, N., & House, J. (2011). Assessment measures 
for child and adolescent eating disorders: A review. 
Child and Adolescent Mental Health
, 
16
, 122-127. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-3588.2010.00579.x
Mitchell, J. E., Roerig, J., & Steffen, K. (2013). Biological 
therapies for eating disorders. 
International Journal of 
Eating Disorders
, 
46
, 470-477. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1002/eat.22104
Morgan, J. F., Reid, F., & Lacey, J. H. (1999). The SCOFF 
questionnaire: Assessment of a new screening 
tool for eating disorders. 
BMJ (Clinical Research 
Ed.)
, 
319
, 1467-1468. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.319.7223.1467
Neumark-Sztainer, D. (2011). Prevention of eating 
disorders in children and adolescents. In D. Le 
Eating Disorders in Children and Adolescents
367
Grange & J. Lock (Eds.), 
Eating disorders in children 
and adolescents: A clinical handbook
 (pp. 421-439). 
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Novins, D. K., Green, A. E., Legha, R. K., & Aarons, G. A.  
(2013). Dissemination and implementation of 
evidence-based practices for child and adolescent 
mental health: A systematic review. 
Journal of the 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
, 
52
, 1009-1025.e18. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.jaac.2013.07.012
Ornstein, R. M., Rosen, D. S., Mammel, K. A., Callahan, S. T.,  
Forman, S., Jay, M. S., . . . Walsh, B. T. (2013). 
Distribution of eating disorders in children and 
adolescents using the proposed 
DSM-5
 criteria for 
feeding and eating disorders. 
Journal of Adolescent 
Health
, 
53
, 303-305. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.jadohealth.2013.03.025
Palmer, R., Christie, M., Cordle, C., Davies, D., Kenrick, J. 
(1987). The clinical eating disorder rating instrument 
(CEDRI): A preliminary description. 
Eating Disorders
, 
6, 9-16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/1098-108X(198701) 
6:1<9::AID-EAT2260060103>3.0.CO;2-Z
Peebles, R., Wilson, J. L., & Lock, J. D. (2006). How do 
children with eating disorders differ from adolescents 
with eating disorders at initial evaluation? 
Journal of 
Adolescent Health
, 
39
, 800-805. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jadohealth.2006.05.013
Polivy, J., & Herman, C. P. (2002). Causes of eating 
disorders. 
Annual Review of Psychology
, 
53
, 
187-213. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
psych.53.100901.135103
Powers, P. S., & Cloak, N. L. (2012). Psychopharmacologic 
treatment of obesity and eating disorders in children 
and adolescents. 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatric 
Clinics of North America
, 
21
, 831-859. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chc.2012.07.003
Pratt, B. M., & Woolfenden, S. R. (2002). Interventions 
for preventing eating disorders in children and 
adolescents. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
, 
2,
 CD002891.
Pretorius, N., Dimmer, M., Power, E., Eisler, I., Simic, M.,  
& Tchanturia, K. (2012). Evaluation of a cognitive 
remediation therapy group for adolescents with 
anorexia nervosa: Pilot study. 
European Eating 
Disorders Review
, 
20
, 321-325. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1002/erv.2176
Raevuori, A., Hoek, H. W., Susser, E., Kaprio, J., Rissanen, A.,  
& Keski-Rahkonen, A. (2009). Epidemiology of 
anorexia nervosa in men: A nationwide study of 
Finnish twins. 
PLOS ONE
, 
4
, e4402. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1371/journal.pone.0004402
Reinblatt, S. P., Redgrave, G. W., & Guarda, A. S. (2008). 
Medication management of pediatric eating disorders. 
International Review of Psychiatry
, 
20
, 183-188. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/09540260801889120
Robin, A. L., Siegel, P. T., Moye, A. W., Gilroy, M., 
Dennis, A. B., & Sikand, A. (1999). A controlled 
comparison of family versus individual therapy for 
adolescents with anorexia nervosa. 
Journal of the 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
, 
38
, 1482-1489. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00004583-
199912000-00008
Root, T. L., Pinheiro, A. P., Thornton, L., Strober, M., 
Fernandez-Aranda, F., Brandt, H., . . . Bulik, C. M. 
(2010). Substance use disorders in women with 
anorexia nervosa. 
International Journal of Eating 
Disorders
, 
43
, 14-21.
Rosen, D. S. (2010). Identification and management of eating 
disorders in children and adolescents. 
Pediatrics
, 
126
, 
1240-1253. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2010-2821
Rossi, G., Balottin, U., Rossi, M., Chiappedi, M., Fazzi, E., &  
Lanzi, G. (2007). Pharmacological treatment 
of anorexia nervosa: A retrospective study in 
preadolescents and adolescents. 
Clinical Pediatrics
, 
46
, 
806-811. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0009922807303929
Russell, G. F., Szmukler, G. I., Dare, C., & Eisler, I. 
(1987). An evaluation of family therapy in anorexia 
nervosa and bulimia nervosa. 
Archives of General 
Psychiatry
, 
44
, 1047-1056. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archpsyc.1987.01800240021004
Russell, G. F. M. (2013). Anorexia nervosa of early onset 
and its impact on puberty. In P. J. Cooper & A. Stein 
(Eds.), 
Childhood feeding problems and adolescent eating 
disorders
 (pp. 160-187). New York, NY: Routledge.
Safer, D. L., Couturier, J. L., & Lock, J. (2007). 
Dialectical behavior therapy modified for adolescent 
binge eating disorder: A case report. 
Cognitive and 
Behavioral Practice
, 
14
, 157-167. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.cbpra.2006.06.001
Schmidt, U., Lee, S., Beecham, J., Perkins, S., Treasure, J., 
Yi, I., . . . Eisler, I. (2007). A randomized controlled 
trial of family therapy and cognitive-behavior 
therapy guided self-care for adolescents with bulimia 
nervosa and related disorders. 
American Journal of 
Psychiatry
, 
164
, 591-598. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/
ajp.2007.164.4.591
Schmidt, U., & Treasure, J. (1997). 
Clinician's guide to 
getting better bit(e) by bit(e): A survival kit for sufferers 
of bulimia nervosa and binge eating disorders
. Hove, 
England: Psychology Press.
Smink, F. R. E., van Hoeken, D., Oldehinkel, A. J., & 
Hoek, H. W. (2014). Prevalence and severity of 
DSM-5
 eating disorders in a community cohort of 
adolescents. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
47
, 610-619. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.22316
Steinhausen, H. C. (2002). The outcome of anorexia 
nervosa in the 20th century. 
American Journal of 
Psychiatry
, 
159
, 1284-1293. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1176/appi.ajp.159.8.1284
Fitzsimmons-Craft, Karam, and Wilfley
368
Steinhausen, H. C., & Weber, S. (2009). The outcome 
of bulimia nervosa: Findings from one-quarter 
century of research. 
American Journal of Psychiatry
, 
166
, 1331-1341. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi.
ajp.2009.09040582
Stice, E. (2002). Risk and maintenance factors for eating 
pathology: A meta-analytic review. 
Psychological 
Bulletin
, 
128
, 825-848. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1037/0033-2909.128.5.825
Stice, E., Marti, C. N., & Rohde, P. (2013). Prevalence, 
incidence, impairment, and course of the proposed 
DSM-5
 eating disorder diagnoses in an 8-year 
prospective community study of young women. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology
, 
122
, 445-457. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0030679
Stice, E., Shaw, H., & Marti, C. N. (2007). A meta-
analytic review of eating disorder prevention 
programs: Encouraging findings. 
Annual Review of 
Clinical Psychology
, 
3
, 207-231. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.3.022806.091447
Stice, E., Telch, C. F., & Rizvi, S. L. (2000). Development 
and validation of the Eating Disorder Diagnostic 
Scale: A brief self-report measure of anorexia, 
bulimia, and binge-eating disorder. 
Psychological 
Assessment
, 
12
, 123-131. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1037/1040-3590.12.2.123
Sullivan, P. F. (1995). Mortality in anorexia nervosa. 
American Journal of Psychiatry
, 
152
, 1073-1074. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/ajp.152.7.1073
Swanson, S. A., Crow, S. J., Le Grange, D., Swendsen, J.,  
& Merikangas, K. R. (2011). Prevalence and 
correlates of eating disorders in adolescents. Results 
from the national comorbidity survey replication 
adolescent supplement. 
Archives of General 
Psychiatry
, 
68
, 714-723. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archgenpsychiatry.2011.22
Szmukler, G. I., Eisler, I., Russell, G. F., & Dare, C. 
(1985). Anorexia nervosa, parental "expressed 
emotion" and dropping out of treatment. 
British 
Journal of Psychiatry
, 
147
, 265-271. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1192/bjp.147.3.265
Tanofsky-Kraff, M., Shomaker, L. B., Olsen, C., Roza, C. A.,  
Wolkoff, L. E., Columbo, K. M., . . . Yanovski, J. 
A. (2011). A prospective study of pediatric loss of 
control eating and psychological outcomes. 
Journal  
of Abnormal Psychology
, 
120
, 108-118. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0021406
Tanofsky-Kraff, M., Shomaker, L. B., Wilfley, D. E., 
Young, J. F., Sbrocco, T., Stephens, M., . . . Yanovski, 
J. A. (2014). Targeted prevention of excess weight 
gain and eating disorders in high-risk adolescent 
girls: A randomized controlled trial. 
American Journal 
of Clinical Nutrition
, 
100
, 1010-1018. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.114.092536
Tanofsky-Kraff, M., Wilfley, D. E., Young, J. F., Mufson, L.,  
Yanovski, S. Z., Glasofer, D. R., . . . Schvey, N. A. 
(2010). A pilot study of interpersonal psychotherapy 
for preventing excess weight gain in adolescent girls 
at-risk for obesity. 
International Journal of Eating 
Disorders,
43
, 701-706. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1002
=
eat.20773
Thelen, M. H., Farmer, J., Wonderlich, S., & Smith, M. 
(1991). A revision of the Bulimia Test: The BULIT-R. 
Psychological Assessment: A Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology
, 
3
, 119-124. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1037/1040-3590.3.1.119
Thomas, J. J., Vartanian, L. R., & Brownell, K. D. 
(2009). The relationship between eating disorder 
not otherwise specified (EDNOS) and officially 
recognized eating disorders: Meta-analysis and 
implications for 
DSM
. 
Psychological Bulletin
, 
135
, 
407-433. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0015326
Trace, S. E., Baker, J. H., Penas-Lledo, E., & Bulik, C. M.  
(2013). The genetics of eating disorders. 
Annual 
Review of Clinical Psychology
, 
9
, 589-620. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-050212-185546
van den Heuvel, L. L., & Jordaan, G. P. (2014). The 
psychopharmacological management of eating 
disorders in children and adolescents. 
Journal of 
Child and Adolescent Mental Health
, 
26
, 125-137. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2989/17280583.2014.909816
Volpe, U., Tortorella, A., Manchia, M., Monteleone, A. M.,  
Albert, U., & Monteleone, P. (2016). Eating 
disorders: What age at onset? 
Psychiatry Research
, 
238
, 225-227. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.psychres.2016.02.048
Walsh, B. T., & Satir, D. A. (2005). Diagnostic issues. In J. 
E. Mitchell & C. B. Peterson (Eds.), 
Assessment of eating 
disorders
 (pp. 1-16). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Wilfley, D. E., MacKenzie, R. K., Welch, R. R., Ayres, V. E.,  
& Weissman, M. M. (2000). 
Interpersonal 
psychotherapy for group
. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Wilfley, D. E., Wilson, G. T., & Agras, W. S. (2003). 
The clinical significance of binge eating disorder. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders
, 
34
(Suppl.), 
S96-S106. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/eat.10209
Wood, L., Al-Khairulla, H., & Lask, B. (2011). Group 
cognitive remediation therapy for adolescents with 
anorexia nervosa. 
Clinical Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry
, 
16
, 225-231. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1177/1359104511404750
Young, J. F., & Mufson, L. (2003). 
Manual for interpersonal 
psychotherapy-adolescent skills training (IPT-AST)
. 
New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
