5

Eating Disorders

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), as applied to eating disorders, is based 
on Beck et al.'s (1979) conceptualization of CBT as "an active, directive, 
time limited, structured approach used to treat a variety of psychiatric disor-
ders" (p. 3). Just a couple of years later, Fairburn (1981) adapted the approach 
for the treatment of bulimia nervosa (BN), and later for binge-eating disorder 
(BED; Fairburn et al., 1993). The core of this treatment has endured as the 
front-line approach for BN and BED. Arguably, anorexia nervosa (AN) has 
been the subject of more popular interest than BN and BED, and the focus of 
its treatment was originally psychodynamic (Bruch, 1970). CBT is also now a 
recommended treatment for AN in adults, but the evidence for its efficacy for 
this disorder, as we review later in the chapter, is inconsistent.
1
BN is characterized by repeated episodes of consuming objectively large 
amounts of food within a limited time frame paired with feeling a loss of con-
trol. Additionally, the use of compensatory behaviors intended to prevent 
weight gain, such as laxative use, self-induced vomiting, and compulsive exer-
cise are employed (Lampard & Sharbanee, 2015). BN was first clinically 
described as we currently recognize it in 1979 by British psychiatrist Gerald 
Russell. Dr. Russell was treating patients with AN when he began seeing 
patients with "powerful and irresistible urges to overeat" in addition to an 
extreme fear of becoming fat (Castillo & Weiselberg, 2017, p. 85). Dr. Russell 
categorized these particular patients as being in a "chronic phase of anorexia 
nervosa" with a poorer prognosis, more resistance to treatment, and dangerous 
1
Clinical examples are disguised to protect patient confidentiality.
Handbook of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy: Applications
, edited by A. Wenzel
Copyright (c) 2021 American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
150 Ruggieri, McCuen-Wurst, and Allison
physical comorbidities (Castillo & Weiselberg, 2017, p. 85). Dr. Russell later 
retracted this statement, stating that individuals diagnosed with BN had a more 
favorable prognosis compared with individuals with AN. He also recognized BN 
and AN as separate eating disorders (Castillo & Weiselberg, 2017). The lifetime 
prevalence of BN is 0.28%, with an estimate of 0.5% in women and 0.15% in 
men, using the 
DSM-5
 criteria among a nationally representative sample in the 
United States (Udo & Grilo, 2018). By comparison, the lifetime prevalence of 
AN is 0.8% overall, with 1.4% among women and 0.1% among men (Udo & 
Grilo, 2018).
Purging disorder is similar to BN, except that the meals prompting the inap-
propriate compensatory behaviors are not "objectively large." Instead, persons 
with purging disorder vomit, use laxatives, or use diuretics after eating a meal 
or a snack (Keel, 2007). These behaviors are still quite serious, even without 
including the objectively large amount of food in the criterion. The prevalence 
of purging disorder is estimated between 1.1% to 5.3% among women, with 
no estimates among men (Keel, 2007). Development of treatments are still 
underway for purging disorder, so the same CBT approach for BN that is dis-
cussed below is typically applied.
BED is also characterized by recurrent episodes of consuming an objectively 
large amount of food in a short period of time paired with a feeling of loss of 
control. During binge episodes of overeating, individuals often eat much more 
rapidly than normal, eat until uncomfortably full, consume a large amount of 
food even when not physically hungry, eat alone due to embarrassment related 
to the amount of food consumed, and feel disgusted, depressed, or guilty after 
these episodes. However, unlike those with BN, those with BED do not use 
compensatory behaviors (American Psychiatric Association [APA], 2013). BED 
was first identified by Dr. Albert Stunkard (1959), who later worked with oth-
ers to establish the first diagnostic criteria for the disorder (Spitzer et al., 1993). 
Although the disorder was previously identified as an "Eating Disorder Not 
Otherwise Specified," it was characterized as its own disorder in the 
DSM-5
 in 
2013 (APA, 2013).
AN is characterized by extreme food restriction that leads to a significantly 
low body weight. Typically, persons with AN develop very strict rules about 
what, when, and how much of any specific food they allow themselves to con-
sume. There is no specific diagnostic cutoff for body mass index (BMI) or per-
cent of expected weight in the 
DSM-5 
criteria, but mild AN would be specified 
by a BMI of 17.00 kg/m
2
 or higher, moderate would be 16.00-16.99 kg/m
2
, 
severe would be 15.00-15.99 kg/m
2
, and extreme would be a BMI below 
15 kg/m
2
 (APA, 2013). For an individual who is 5 ft 5 in., this would translate 
into weights of >= 103 lb for mild, between 96 and 102 lb for moderate, between 
90 and 95 lb for severe, and <= 89 lb for extreme. Individuals with AN have a 
strong fear of weight gain or becoming fat. They also place a very high value on 
their shape and weight for self-evaluation, accompanied by very little insight 
into their actual shape and size and the seriousness of their low weight as it 
relates to their medical, psychological, and social well-being. There is a restrict-
Eating Disorders 151
ing type and a binge-purge type, where persons restrict most of the time but 
also have periodic binge-purge episodes. If all the criteria for AN are met, a 
diagnosis of AN will override a diagnosis of BN, BED, or purging disorder.
Night-eating syndrome (NES) consists of a delayed pattern of eating, such 
that individuals consume at least 25% of their intake after the evening meal, 
and/or they wake during the night to eat at least twice per week (Allison, 
Lundgren, O'Reardon, et al., 2010). Persons with NES are aware of their night-
time eating; if they are sleepwalking and eating or have very limited awareness, 
it would be considered sleep-related eating disorder (SRED), which is a para-
somnia (American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 2014). The diagnostic criteria 
indicate three of the following features should also be present: (a) lack of appe-
tite in the morning/skipping breakfast more than half the time; (b) a strong 
desire to eat between dinner and bedtime; (c) initial onset or middle insomnia 
at least half the time; (d) the belief that one must eat to fall (back) asleep; and 
(e) low mood or worsening mood as the day progresses. Distress regarding this 
behavior should also be present. Although NES can be diagnosed comorbidly 
with the other eating disorders, careful consideration of other primary causes 
should be determined, such as medications (i.e., sleep agents such as zolpidem) 
or other causes of insomnia. Prevalence of NES is estimated at 4.6% in men and 
3.4% in women among participants in the Swedish Twin Registry (Tholin et al., 
2009), and 3.8% of men and 4.3% of women among a U.S. university sample 
(Runfola et al., 2014).
BULIMIA NERVOSA

Underlying Theory
We start with BN because its treatment serves as the foundation of CBT for all 
of the eating disorders. The cognitive behavioral theory posits that the core 
psychopathology of BN is related to overvaluation of shape and weight, or 
judging one's self-worth mostly by weight and body shape, thus ignoring per-
ceived performance in other domains of life (Cooper & Fairburn, 2011; DuBois 
et al., 2017). In turn, overvaluation of shape and weight can result in dietary 
restraint and restriction, body checking, and preoccupation with thoughts 
about shape and weight (Cooper & Fairburn, 2011). Individuals with BN tend 
to marginalize other areas of their lives due to this focus, which becomes a los-
ing proposition given that controlling one's weight and shape completely is 
difficult, if not impossible, thus maintaining low self-esteem. This overly depen-
dent self-evaluation based on shape and weight leads to the behaviors that 
characterize BN (Murphy et al., 2010).
One aspect of BN that is not directly related to overvaluation of shape and 
weight is binge eating. The cognitive behavioral theory posits that binge eating 
occurs in response to attempts to adhere to extreme dietary rules. Breaking 
these rules strengthens patients' beliefs that they lack self-control, which main-
tains the core features of the psychopathology (Fairburn et al., 2008; Murphy 
et al., 2010). Binge episodes often occur in response to negative mood states 
152 Ruggieri, McCuen-Wurst, and Allison
and act as a temporary mood neutralizer. This response can result in habitual 
binge-eating when negative mood states are present (Fairburn, 2002).
BN often goes unnoticed, as individuals with the disorder are at or above the 
normal weight range. In addition, those with the disorder often do not have 
medical complaints that would warrant visiting a physician (Castillo & Weisel-
berg, 2017). When individuals do seek treatment for the disorder, the literature 
shows that the treatment of choice for BN is CBT (Cooper & Fairburn, 2011). 
CBT-BN is utilized with individuals who can be treated on an outpatient basis. 
Treatment typically lasts up to 20 sessions, with maintenance or booster ses-
sions following less frequently, as needed. With some individuals, progress is 
limited by maintenance factors associated with the core psychopathology of 
BN, including clinical perfectionism and low self-esteem (Fairburn, 2002), 
which are discussed below.
Main Procedures
Treatment is relatively short term (about 20 sessions delivered over 16 weeks 
on average, with some variability) and is based on a structured manual to be 
led by a trained clinician. Treatment can be divided into several stages, as 
described by Fairburn et al. (2008). Stage one involves establishing a therapeu-
tic relationship, as well as the introduction of self-monitoring. Detailed logs of 
all food and beverages consumed, accompanied by associated thoughts and 
feelings are established in this first stage. Psychoeducation on the ill effects of 
rigid dieting and purging behaviors is provided, and implementation of a more 
regular eating pattern and healthy food choices are also introduced. Ideas about 
healthy shape and weight are discussed, and weekly weighing is established. 
The first several sessions are delivered twice per week to establish momentum. 
Stage two aims to help individuals deal with the dysfunctional thoughts and 
triggers that drive their dieting behaviors, such as rigid rules around food that 
lead to binge eating. The cognitions typically addressed are targeted to (a) cre-
ate insight into the impact of overvaluation of weight and shape and its conse-
quences, (b) develop other aspects central to one's self-concept, (c) challenge 
body-checking and feelings of "fatness," (d) examine etiological factors for 
overvaluation, and (e) develop skills to address eating disordered attitudes and 
thoughts. During stage three, progress is reviewed, and realistic planning for 
the future is discussed (Fairburn, 1995). These final sessions may be delivered 
every other week.
More recently, an updated form of CBT has been developed called 
enhanced 
CBT
 (CBT-E). CBT-E was developed in response to the finding that many eating 
disorders have similar core psychopathology (Fairburn et al., 2003), and thus a 
more inclusive treatment was developed to treat all eating disorders using a 
"transdiagnostic approach" (Fairburn et al., 2008). The CBT-E model suggests 
that the core psychopathology of BN may be maintained by (a) mood intoler-
ance, (b) clinical perfectionism, (c) low self-esteem, and/or (d) interpersonal 
problems. In the first model, the impulse to binge and purge is due to mood 
Eating Disorders 153
intolerance; binge eating and purging functions to regulate emotions. Clinical 
perfectionism refers to striving toward extremely high standards in every 
domain of one's life. The term "clinical" refers to perfectionism becoming prob-
lematic when attempts to pursue these high standards continue despite nega-
tive consequences. Perfectionistic standards with regard to weight and shape 
would then lead to disordered eating. Core low self-esteem refers to an insidi-
ous negative view of self-worth. In the CBT-E model of treatment for BN, core 
low self-esteem differs from low self-esteem in that it is unconditional, which is 
more pervasive as opposed to being situational or limited in scope. Individuals 
with BN characterized by core low self-esteem are not affected by changes or 
improvements in the state of the disorder, as they believe these eating patterns 
are part of their identity (Cooper & Fairburn, 2011). In other words, core low 
self-esteem contributes to hopelessness about one's ability to change, which 
may negatively affect treatment. Interpersonal problems contribute to core low 
self-esteem while creating negative mood states, leading to binge eating and 
purging behaviors (Lampard & Sharbanee, 2015). Cooper and Fairburn (2010) 
stated that most patients will benefit from the original CBT for BN approach, 
but for those presenting with more complex pathology, initiating the broad-
ened treatment is useful.
Efficacy
Research on the effects of CBT-BN indicates that half the patients make a full 
and lasting recovery, with the most significant effect being the reduction of the 
frequency of binge episodes and compensatory behaviors (Fairburn, 2002; 
Fairburn et al., 2008). In a systematic, quantitative review of psychotherapy for 
BN, Hay et al. (2009) identified CBT as significantly superior to no treatment or 
wait-list control for the proportion of patients in remission from binge eating, 
RR
 = 0.69, 95% CI [0.61, 0.79]. When compared with other psychotherapies, 
including hypnotherapy and psychoanalytic or psychodynamic therapy, CBT 
has been shown to be more efficacious in the treatment of BN symptoms, 
RR
 = 0.83, 95% CI [0.71, 0.97]. CBT was also superior to no treatment or 
wait-list control in reducing depressive symptoms, 
SMD
 = -0.69, 95% CI [-1.09, 
0.30], whereas it was favored, but not statistically significant, over the previ-
ously listed psychotherapies in reducing depressive symptoms, 
SMD
 = -0.28, 
95% CI [-0.57, 0.00].
CBT-E therapy is considered "enhanced" because, as mentioned above, it 
incorporates strategies to improve outcomes associated with hindrances to 
change, including mood intolerance, clinical perfectionism, low self-esteem 
and interpersonal problems, in addition to focusing on overvaluation of shape 
and weight (Murphy et al., 2010). In a trial conducted by Fairburn et al. (2009), 
154 participants were enrolled in a two-site randomized controlled trial (RCT) 
involving 20 weeks of treatment and a 60-week follow-up period. The two 
forms of treatment were enhanced, with the "focused" approach targeting dis-
ordered eating psychopathology exclusively, and the "broad" version targeting 
154 Ruggieri, McCuen-Wurst, and Allison
one or more of the associated problems, in addition to the core psychopathol-
ogy. Participants in the control condition had an 8-week waiting period prior to 
treatment. Results were based on global EDE change and showed that patients 
in the wait-list control group demonstrated little change in symptom severity 
(-0.09), whereas those in the active conditions (focused and broad) displayed 
significant and equal change in symptom severity (-1.51 vs. -1.53, respec-
tively); this change was maintained during follow-up.
One form of therapy that has been used as a comparator for CBT is interper-
sonal psychotherapy (IPT). IPT is an evidence-based psychotherapy for disor-
ders in which interpersonal difficulties are maintaining factors. With regard to 
eating disorders, patients can become more isolated from their peers due to 
their eating disordered attitudes and behaviors, resulting in psychopathology 
that persists because it goes unnoticed. In addition, interpersonal problems can 
exacerbate or cause low self-esteem, which tends to increase efforts to control 
shape and weight (Murphy et al., 2012). IPT can be used as an alternative to 
CBT-BN, but treatment often lasts longer (approximately 8-12 months longer), 
and treatment responses tend to be slower in the beginning, but similar over 
longer follow-up periods (Fairburn et al., 2008).
In a study conducted by Agras et al. (2000), 220 patients meeting criteria 
for BN were randomized to 19 sessions of either CBT or IPT and evaluated for 
1 year after treatment. Results indicated that CBT was significantly superior 
to IPT at treatment end for the proportion of individuals recovered (29% vs. 
6%) and remitted (48% vs. 28%). For treatment completers, the proportion 
recovered was 45% in CBT versus 8% in IPT. However, at the 1-year follow- 
up, there were no significant differences between the CBT and IPT treatment 
completers.
Special Considerations With This Population
CBT-BN has been tested in adolescents and adults. There do not seem to be any 
contraindications for its use based on gender or race/ethnicity. As noted above, 
if certain core psychopathologies are present, the broad version of CBT-E should 
be employed (NICE, 2017).
Mechanisms of Change
In the original CBT-BN model, changes in overvaluation of shape and weight 
and dietary restraint are the two most important mechanisms of change (Lam-
pard & Sharbanee, 2015). Studies have shown that changes in these two factors 
relate to changes in BN symptoms, such as reductions in binge eating and com-
pensatory behaviors. CBT-E utilizes different modules that are meant to treat 
different maintaining factors of BN, in addition to treatment of the core psycho-
pathology. For example, the mood intolerance module is intended to lead to 
changes in mood, which will then lead to reductions in binge eating (Lampard 
& Sharbanee, 2015). Peterson et al. (2017) showed that improvement in emo-
Eating Disorders 155
tion regulation, or the ability to tolerate momentary negative mood states and 
self-directed behavior from baseline to midtreatment and to posttreatment 
follow-up, predicted improvements in global eating disorder scores.
Application to Diverse Populations
Statistics on the prevalence of eating disorders in minority populations are 
scarce. This may be due to a historically biased view that only White women 
suffer from eating disorders or that few studies have been conducted with sig-
nificant numbers of people from varying racial and ethnic groups and men 
(Ham et al., 2015). Following completion of diagnostic interviews by a national 
representative sample of adults in the United States, Udo and Grilo (2018) 
reported that, on the basis of 
DSM-5 
criteria, the lifetime prevalence for BN was 
0.28%. Prevalence of any eating disorder was greater for women than for men 
after adjusting for various demographic variables including age and race and/or 
ethnicity. Adjusted odds ratios did not differ significantly by race and/or ethnic-
ity for BN. The same study examined these differences for AN, showing signifi-
cantly lower adjusted odds ratios for non-Hispanic Black (
AOR
 = 0.48, 95% CI 
[0.33, 0.72]) and Hispanic (
AOR
 = 0.19, 95% CI [0.11, 0.33]) respondents than 
for non-Hispanic White respondents. Finally, for BED, Udo and Grilo (2018) 
reported lower lifetime (
AOR
 = 0.60, 95% CI [0.38, 0.92]), but not 12-month, 
adjusted odds ratios for non-Hispanic Black compared with non-Hispanic 
White individuals.
Case Example
"Erica" reported starting to binge and purge with vomiting during her fresh-
man year of high school. She was attending a high-pressure private school that 
she found challenging, but she was supported by her family, and she was par-
ticularly close with her father. Tragically, her father died in an accident, and she 
was having trouble coping. She started to eat emotionally, and she started gain-
ing weight. After eating sweets in the evening, she would try to restrict what 
she ate the next morning, fearing she would continue gaining weight. She was 
active as a soccer player, and she also enjoyed running in the off season. Over 
her high school years, her binge-and-purge episodes continued, but she was 
able to hide them. She presented for treatment her senior year in college, afraid 
that she would continue this pattern even after she graduated. It had started to 
sink in that this was not just a temporary fix but a cycle that had taken on a life 
of its own.
Erica described experiencing stress related to her coursework and her rela-
tionships with her mother and her peers. By now, her mother knew of Erica's 
disordered eating, but she was uncertain how to address it. They bickered over 
concerns for Erica's well-being and the financial burden the binge episodes 
were causing. Erica's mood was also affected by these binge-purge episodes, 
which negatively influenced her body image further. This led to trying on 
156 Ruggieri, McCuen-Wurst, and Allison
outfits for up to an hour before going out with friends or avoiding social events 
altogether. Finally, with school, if she felt overwhelmed by starting a project or 
studying for an exam, she would be triggered to binge, followed by vomiting. 
She would then feel ill and end up watching shows or movies in her room by 
herself, leading to missed deadlines and poor grades.
Therapy began with a log of her eating and purging behaviors to identify her 
pattern of eating and the triggers for her binge episodes. Erica identified several 
episodes from the previous week. The therapist spent time reviewing a partic-
ular episode with her that involved baking brownies for a fundraiser for her 
club soccer team (see Figure 5.1). She also felt overwhelmed because she had a 
paper due the next day and did not know where to start. She began eating the 
brownies and was unable to stop, finishing the whole pan. She felt disgusted 
and overly full, but she thought it would be okay because she could get rid of 
the calories and the feeling of being too full if she just vomited. Afterward, she 
was exhausted and shut herself in her room to watch shows the rest of the 
night. She felt sad and ashamed the next morning when she had to ask her 
professor for an extension for her paper.
First, psychoeducation was provided regarding the limited effectiveness of 
purging to compensate for the calories consumed. Next, the therapist used a 
thought record to help her identify the situation--having a paper due, but not 
knowing where to begin. Next, she identified her feelings, which included feel-
ing anxious, overwhelmed, and tired, as well as her automatic thoughts. These 
thoughts included, "I can't come up with a good idea for how to start my paper. 
Whatever I write, it won't be good enough," and, "The brownies look so good, 
it will be okay if I just eat one." After not being able to stop and eating the pan 
of brownies, she identified these thoughts: "I feel disgusting. If I just throw up, 
I will feel better and will be able to get on with my night." After vomiting she 
FIGURE 5.1.
 Food Intake and Binge/Compensatory Behavior Log
Time
Location
What did 
you eat?
Binge? Compensation?
Comments
12:00 
pm
Dining 
Hall
Salad with 
chicken, 
vegetables 
and oil & 
vinegar
6:00 
pm
Home
Egg white (2) 
omelet with 
cheese and 
vegetables
8 pm
Home
Full pan of 
brownies
I was stressed about writing 
a paper and had just made 
the brownies for my club's 
fundraiser.  I wanted to just 
eat one, but I couldn't stop.  
I felt so full that I had to 
make myself vomit. Then I 
was relieved, but exhausted.  
I didn't feel up to doing any 
schoolwork. 
Note. 
Example from a patient with bulimia nervosa.
Eating Disorders 157
stated, "I am worn out and can't concentrate. I don't feel better and don't feel 
up to writing." The therapist helped Erica identify alternative responses to each 
thought, also asking her to recognize and tolerate her negative emotions. For 
example, although she was feeling anxious about writing, her homework for 
the coming week was to open a document and start typing her ideas out, no 
matter how tired or overwhelmed she felt. She believed that once she was sit-
ting and writing, she would be able to complete the assignment, so she agreed 
to this homework task.
Erica was also having trouble resisting vomiting after normal meals given 
the frequency of her episodes. She stated that even any "normal" sized meal 
made her feel uncomfortable. The therapist used exposure exercises to have 
her sit after meals and engage in conversation or go somewhere where she was 
unable to purge to prevent compensation from occurring. Finally, the therapist 
helped her use these tools to address her body image issues and improve com-
munications with her mother around her eating and weight concerns so that 
Erica's need to be secretive about it would lessen and she could start to rebuild 
her relationship with her mother. A joint session was held to help facilitate 
communication between Erica and her mother, as well.
As sessions progressed, Erica was able to show good understanding and use 
of the CBT skills, decreasing her binging and purging episodes over time. She 
was still having periodic episodes in response to stressors or when home alone 
with access to baked goods or granola bars (two of her most difficult trigger 
foods), but she was pleased with her progress and felt more confident about 
graduating and moving into an "adult life" without the burden of BN. She felt 
more confident in her body as well, as she generally felt more in control and 
less depressed. She had even begun dating a fellow student as the sessions 
concluded.
BINGE-EATING DISORDER

Underlying Theory
Theories of the psychopathology of BED are based on cognitive behavioral the-
ory and the restraint model (Grilo, 2017). According to cognitive behavioral 
theory, BED, similar to the models for AN and BN, can be characterized by an 
excessive attention to weight and shape, a desire for control associated with 
eating behavior, and/or emotional dysregulation (Fairburn, 2017; Haedt-Matt 
& Keel, 2011; Haedt-Matt et al., 2014; Wilfley et al., 2000). Although overvalu-
ation of weight and shape is not included as a diagnostic criterion for BED, its 
presence typically indicates a more severe form of the disorder (Mitchison et 
al., 2018). Additionally, there are particular cognitive and behavioral differ-
ences observed in those with BED that are not observed in those with AN nor 
BN. Wilfley et al. (2000) found that individuals with BED have significantly 
lower cognitive restraint of eating (i.e. deliberately restricting food in an effort 
to align with rigid rules regarding eating) scores compared with those with AN 
and BN. Further, persons with BED are more likely to report eating in secret, 
158 Ruggieri, McCuen-Wurst, and Allison
being unsatisfied with their weight, feeling fat, being unhappy with their shape, 
and experiencing discomfort with seeing their body compared with individuals 
with AN, BN, and persons who have overweight or obesity but who have no 
eating disorder. Compared with those with AN and BN, people with BED do 
not have a significant desire to have a completely flat stomach and report less 
distress and less avoidance of eating (Wilfley et al., 2000).
Whereas the cognitive behavioral theory of binge eating suggests that 
thoughts and feelings about body shape and size and other emotional distress 
become triggers for binge episodes, the restraint theory suggests that dieting 
increases the likelihood of binge eating. As a result of a calorie deficit, either 
through dieting or skipping meals, hunger levels increase, leading to a sense of 
loss of control once eating is allowed. The more frequently this restriction 
occurs, followed by a binge episode, the more likely it is for a cyclical pattern to 
develop (Polivy & Herman, 1985). However, not all persons with BED have a 
history of restriction. Thus, binge eating could also result as a means of con-
trolling or distracting oneself from experiencing emotional dysregulation.
Main Procedures
CBT for binge eating focuses on the cognitive distortions often exhibited in 
those with eating disorders (Fairburn, 2017), such as concerns about shape and 
weight, "all or nothing" thinking, perfectionism, and low self-esteem. Given 
the influence that weight and shape have on the way individuals with BED 
view themselves, treatment focuses on improving self-confidence and discov-
ering alternative influences on self-worth other than weight and shape. Treat-
ment also focuses on creating more regular healthy eating habits and identifying 
and resolving triggers associated with maladaptive eating patterns. CBT for 
binge eating was adapted from CBT-BN (Fairburn et al., 2008), as described 
previously.
As with any manualized form of treatment, it is important to follow the pro-
tocol for optimal effectiveness. A meta-analysis by Vocks et al. (2010) examin-
ing various forms of treatment for binge eating found CBT-based psychotherapy 
and structured self-help to have a strong effect on reduction in binge eating. 
Evidence suggests that following a structured program may be a useful first-line 
approach to treating BED, and also that using a self-help approach based on the 
manual holds promise and may also increase access to CBT care (Grilo, 2017).
Special Considerations With This Population
A majority of those with BED have other psychiatric and medical comorbidi-
ties, independent of weight status (Kessler et al., 2013). There is a strong evi-
dence base of a high comorbidity rate between psychological disorders and 
BED, with the most common disorders being mood, anxiety, and substance use 
disorders. Additionally, BED is associated with medical comorbidities, such as 
dyslipidemia and Type 2 diabetes; however, the evidence is not as consistent for 
Eating Disorders 159
medical as for the psychopathology comorbidities (Devlin, 2017). Although 
comorbidities are important to consider when conceptualizing a clinical case, 
they do not necessarily have an effect on treatment outcomes (Kessler et al., 
2013), as discussed in the section on mechanisms of change. As with the other 
eating disorders, individuals with BED often have complex presentations, with 
binge eating representing only one of many health concerns.
Efficacy
CBT is considered the leading psychological approach to treatment for eating 
disorders by both the American Psychiatric Association (Yager et al., 2012) and 
the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE, 2017), with CBT 
for BED proven efficacious in eliminating binge episodes in about 60% of those 
who receive treatment (Fairburn, 2017). In addition, CBT for BED has been 
shown to reduce eating-disorder-related psychopathology, including depres-
sion. CBT for BED has largely been proven superior against controls such as 
medications and behavioral weight loss in binge eating outcomes. It is import-
ant to note that while CBT for BED is efficacious in improving the aforemen-
tioned symptoms, it is not particularly helpful for weight loss (Grilo, 2017).
A meta-analysis by Vocks et al. (2010) that included 1,973 participants 
found CBT more efficacious in reducing binge-eating frequency (
d
 = 0.82, 95% 
CI [0.41, 1.22]) and days with binge eating (
d
 = 1.04, 95% CI [0.70, 1.38]), as 
well as increasing binge-eating abstinence (
d
 = 6.83, 95% CI [3.50, 13.33]) 
compared with untreated control groups. CBT also was found to reduce 
binge-eating-related psychopathology such as depression (
d
 = 0.36, 95% CI 
[0.08, 0.64]), to a lesser degree, and concerns about weight (
d
 = 0.85, 95% CI 
[0.43, 1.27]) and eating (
d
 = 1.43, 95% CI [0.84, 2.01]). CBT for BED did not 
significantly reduce dietary restraint scores, shape concern, or body mass as 
compared with those without treatment. Vocks et al. (2010) also found that 
self-help CBT significantly reduced binge frequency (
d
 = 0.84, 95% CI [0.37, 
1.30]) and concerns with weight (
d
 = 0.85, 95% CI [0.43, 1.27]) and eating 
(
d
 = 1.43, 95% CI [0.84, 2.01]), while increasing binge abstinence (
d
 = 25.77, 
95% CI [9.74, 68.15]). Additional improvements observed with self-help CBT 
include decreased dietary restraint scores (
d
 = 0.68, 95% CI [0.09, 1.26]) and 
concerns associated with shape (
d
 = 0.66, 95% CI [0.25, 1.07]); however, this 
self-help form of therapy did not significantly reduce depressive symptoms.
Brownley et al.'s (2016) systematic review and meta-analysis found 
therapist-led and structured self-help CBT for BED more efficacious in decreas-
ing binge frequency and increasing binge-eating abstinence compared with 
wait-list controls (58.8% vs. 11.2%, 
RR
 = 4.95, 95% CI [3.06, 8.00]). Therapist- 
led CBT also significantly reduced global eating disordered attitudes and behav-
iors (strength of evidence, moderate; no relative risk reported), but not depres-
sive symptoms or body mass. Multiple studies have found no to minimal effect 
of combining medication with CBT compared with CBT alone for the treatment 
of BED (Devlin et al., 2005).
160 Ruggieri, McCuen-Wurst, and Allison
Mechanisms of Change
Although CBT for BED has been established as one of the leading treatments 
for binge eating, there is a paucity of literature on mechanisms of change. Grilo 
et al. (2012) examined moderators and predictors of response to CBT treat-
ment. They found the most predictive and moderating trait of binge eating 
remission in CBT treatment was the overvaluation of shape/weight, whereby 
those who had lower scores of overvaluation of shape/weight were more suc-
cessful at treatment end. Several demographic variables, including education 
status and older age of onset of the disorder, were associated with higher rates 
of binge remission. However, Grilo et al. (2012) found that psychiatric disor-
ders, personality disorders, and obesity failed to predict or moderate BED treat-
ment outcomes. Medical comorbidities, which are also often found among 
those with BED, have not been examined as predictors of treatment efficacy.
A systematic review by Vall and Wade (2015) examining predictors of effi-
cacy among various BED treatments found several significant factors. First, 
higher weight suppression (i.e., the difference between an individual's highest 
weight and current weight) was associated with more binge episodes. Second, 
more frequent binge eating at baseline predicted worse binge-eating outcomes 
at end of treatment. Third, higher motivation to change and less eating disorder 
pathology predicted better outcomes. Finally, several psychopathology mea-
sures at baseline predicted better outcomes, including lower depressive symp-
tom scores, higher BMI, higher self-esteem, lower weight/shape concerns, 
older age of onset, shorter duration of the disorder, less comorbid psychopa-
thology, and better interpersonal functioning. It is important to note that while 
the majority of studies examined in this systematic review included forms of 
CBT, the authors did not exclusively examine CBT, including other forms of 
treatment as well.
Kober and Boswell (2018) argued that neural processing features and cer-
tain areas of the brain, such as the ventral striatum, amygdala, insula, and 
orbitofrontal cortex (Boswell & Kober, 2016), now often measured in brain 
imaging studies, may also provide insight into treatment outcomes. They offer 
that impairments in cognitive control and increased emotional reactivity, 
food-cue reactivity, and cravings are likely related to emotion dysregulation, 
which in turn may cue binge eating. However, more research is needed to pair 
outcomes with imaging studies to outcomes in CBT trials for BED.
Application to Diverse Populations
A randomized placebo-controlled trial by Grilo et al. (2014) evaluated the 
effectiveness of a weight-loss medication (sibutramine) and a self-help form of 
CBT, alone and in combination, in an ethnically diverse primary care setting 
(55% non-White) for the treatment of BED. Although sibutramine was associ-
ated with greater weight loss compared with placebo, none of the treatments 
differed in binge-eating outcomes. Demographic factors, such as age, sex, race, 
and education, did not predict any changes in outcomes. It appears that CBT for 
Eating Disorders 161
binge eating is equally effective across different demographics, but more studies 
would be valuable to confirm these results.
Clinical Example
"John" is a 40-year-old African American man with a BMI of 42.1 kg/m
2
 (5 ft 
8 in., 285 lb) who meets the criteria for BED. He works as a delivery person for 
a local paper product manufacturer whose primary clients are various restau-
rants in the area. Each day while making deliveries, he is offered food (e.g., 
pizza, sandwiches, baked goods, etc.; see Figure 5.2). John usually skips break-
fast to control his weight. He often packs what is considered a normal sized 
lunch, such as a turkey and cheese sandwich, small bag of chips, a granola bar, 
and soda, but he typically eats it around 10:00 a.m., well before he originally 
intended. Later on, he continues to snack on the foods offered to him from 
various restaurants. For example, he may eat a slice of pizza around 11:30 a.m., 
then a side of French fries and large (12 in.) cheese steak around 1:00 p.m. This 
pattern continues throughout the day.
John finishes his shift around 4:00 p.m. and has dinner with his wife and 
two children at their home around 5:45 p.m. However, about twice per week, 
John will stop, without his wife knowing, at his favorite Italian chain 
FIGURE 5.2.
 Example of Behavioral Chain for Binge-Eating Disorder
162 Ruggieri, McCuen-Wurst, and Allison
restaurant for an all-you-can eat dinner after 4:00 p.m. During these occasions, 
he eats about five breadsticks, three large bowls of salad, and two large pasta 
entrees. Once he begins eating, he reports feeling immense pleasure and inabil-
ity to stop. He orders the second pasta and tells himself that he will buy it now 
but save it for his lunch tomorrow. However, once the food arrives, he always 
ends up eating that portion before he leaves. He keeps these episodes from his 
wife, using cash instead of charging the meal. This routine has become a secre-
tive, affair-like relationship with food. When he returns home and eats dinner 
with his family, he has a regular plate of food (i.e., two grilled chicken breasts, 
one cup of macaroni and cheese, and a baked potato). Often, he will follow 
dinner with dessert, such as two ice cream bars or a one-eighth portion of pie, 
from about 5:45 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. He reports having his restaurant meal before 
his "actual dinner" because he is embarrassed about overeating in front of his 
family. This way, he can enjoy his large meal by himself without the shame and 
guilt he experiences from eating large amounts in front of others. Although 
John feels pleasure while eating, he feels guilty and disgusted afterward, and 
his eating is negatively impacting his relationship with his family. John has 
experienced nine binge episodes per week, on average, for the past 2 years.
In treatment, the therapist began by reviewing the CBT model for the treat-
ment of BED. The therapist reviewed a food log form to track his intake 
throughout the day, including when, what, and how much he was eating, and 
what triggers may have been present before eating. Next, they completed a 
behavioral chain to make the chain of events explicit. Completing these exer-
cises increased his awareness regarding his belief that restricting in the morning 
would be healthy, but in fact, it was prompting him to eat his lunch early, pro-
ducing dichotomous thinking that he had ruined his plan for the day, so he 
might as well eat the food that was offered to him at the restaurants. He was 
assigned to begin eating a nutritionally sound breakfast and continuing to pack 
his lunch and snacks. Dysfunctional thought records were introduced next to 
modify these automatic thoughts, including the opportunity to generate alter-
native responses he could use in those situations. Each week, he completed 
these tools to provide opportunities during each therapy session to use each 
difficult eating situation as a learning tool, and to illustrate progress when he 
successfully resisted loss-of-control eating episodes. As he progressed through 
treatment, he gained momentum by internalizing his successes and building 
self-efficacy for his ability to decline food offers from the restaurants.
The therapist also helped John focus on alternative activities he could do 
after work when he was feeling compelled to stop at the restaurant. This inter-
vention included planning a different route home so he would avoid driving 
near the restaurant and setting up an exercise routine for himself with his chil-
dren or his wife, when possible, during that time instead. He also generated 
other ideas for filling that time, like accomplishing household tasks that had 
been lingering or starting a hobby that he had not participated in for a while. 
The final target of treatment included targeting his body dissatisfaction. Follow-
ing the use of Socratic questioning (i.e., asking key questions to draw out 
Eating Disorders 163
answers to the patient's own questions and to uncover assumptions that may 
be the basis for one's automatic thoughts), John was able to describe the pres-
sure he was feeling from his wife and his own standards to preserve a muscular 
physique that he had when he was several years younger. He viewed himself 
as a failure with his 30-pound weight gain over the previous 2 years, and he 
was developing health issues, such as high blood pressure and hyperlipidemia.
The therapist used thought records to help John modify his discomfort with 
his body, as well as emphasize healthy eating habits and physical activity that 
would help to address his growing health concerns. Finally, marital issues that 
contributed to his secretive, disordered eating behaviors were addressed, and 
the therapist assigned John exercises to talk with his wife regarding the impact 
of her language regarding health behaviors and body shape and size expecta-
tions on his emotional and physical functioning. A typical thought was "My 
wife won't know that I ate it, so I might as well have it now so that I don't 
overeat in front of her and risk having her comment about it." An alternative 
thought that he eventually generated was "Just because my wife doesn't know, 
doesn't mean that I don't end up feeling badly about it. I will feel better if I say 
no now, and I will not feel like I'm hiding things from her and my kids."
John found success by instituting a regular eating schedule and by typically 
packing his own meals and snacks. He developed the ability to decline foods 
that were offered to him on his deliveries, and the business owners stopped 
offering food so frequently as his responses remained consistent. He physically 
felt better and less sluggish by the end of the day, so he was more open to going 
home and spending time with his children and being active with them or by 
himself. He also felt as though a burden had been lifted between him and his 
wife, as he was not spending money for binge episodes and hiding his behavior. 
John was able to communicate more openly with his wife about comments and 
rules that she had regarding weight and eating that were maintaining his secre-
tive eating behaviors, raising her awareness of the paradoxical result that her 
comments were having. She was able to prepare meals and snacks that pro-
vided more satiety for John, and to support his packing and preparing of meals 
and snacks for work. Overall, John reduced his binge episodes to about once 
per month. In the final sessions, the focus was on his ability to recover from 
infrequent episodes and learn from the triggering event, emotion, or thought to 
continue preventing binge episodes from occurring most of the time.
ANOREXIA NERVOSA

Underlying Theory
After Fairburn adapted Beck's CBT for depression for use with BN, others in the 
field (e.g., Garner & Bemis, 1982, 1985) provided a treatment manual of CBT 
for AN. The formulation of CBT for AN is similar to that described above for BN 
and BED; overvaluation of weight and shape, which are rooted in low 
self-esteem, lead to a strong drive or desire to control one's weight and shape 
through extreme restriction of food intake. Thus, the cognitive disturbance 
164 Ruggieri, McCuen-Wurst, and Allison
--extreme dissatisfaction with weight and shape--leads persons with AN to 
make choices to restrict their intake or compensate inappropriately after eating 
(the behavior). This becomes a cycle that is quite difficult to break.
Persons with AN differ from those with BN and BED by their achievement 
of a very low body weight. To reach such a low weight, individuals typically 
have certain personality features, such as perfectionism, and a temperament 
that can sustain such self-deprivation. Their low self-esteem is often tied to 
feelings of social unease and ineffectiveness, and they often lack an awareness 
of their feelings (a lack of interoceptive awareness), such that they are unable 
to express their emotions constructively. They then turn their distress inward 
and try to put their focus on controlling their eating in order to control their 
weight and shape, which is conceptualized as a strong drive for thinness. 
AN-restricting subtype is manifested by strict restrictive behaviors, and 
AN-binge-purge subtype is characterized by dietary restriction most of the time, 
interrupted by binge-purge episodes, which also can become cyclical. Once 
caught in this cycle, eating causes increasing discomfort--both cognitively, with 
negative thoughts about one's value as a person if they eat something "bad" or 
too much of a serving, and physically, with increasing gastrointestinal discom-
fort as weight loss and starvation become severe. Persons with AN obsess about 
food and planning what and how they will eat the little amount of food that 
they allow themselves, and their worlds generally become smaller. They isolate 
themselves more to focus on their food and weight goals and become less able 
to eat or socialize with others because of their extreme eating rules and rituals. 
However, they are living in a trapped world where they believe the only way 
they can increase their self-esteem is to control their weight and shape.
Main Procedures
CBT for AN consists of the same phases of treatment as described above for BN; 
however, the first goal of treatment for AN is always weight gain. This is so for 
obvious safety reasons, but also for efficacy reasons. If someone is starving, 
their thinking becomes increasingly rigid, and it becomes difficult to engage in 
talk therapy in an effective manner. Thus, in the first phase, the rationale for 
CBT is described, and psychoeducation is provided on the biological, psycholog-
ical, and social underpinnings of the disorder. Persons with AN are often reluc-
tant to engage in treatment, as their loved ones may be more distressed by their 
symptoms than they are, so an appraisal of their motivation for treatment is 
useful. This phase is also a time to build the therapeutic relationship by focusing 
on setting collaborative goals for improvements. This can be challenging for 
those with AN because they may not want to gain weight, but in outpatient 
treatment, clear goals should be set for progression of weight gain. A skilled 
therapist will set about this task in an empathic and open manner so that 
patients have a voice in expressing their goals and desires for regarding their 
eating disorder and their desired quality of life. The therapist can carefully high-
light how the eating disorder has increasingly taken on its own life, and how it 
Eating Disorders 165
initially may have felt to the patient that they were in control, but now the AN 
is in charge. As this conversation progresses, along with weight gain, patients 
can start to disengage from the AN thoughts and behaviors, and they improve 
their ability to express longer term goals and desires for their lives outside of 
weight and shape.
Weight is taken at each treatment session on a regular schedule--typically at 
the beginning of each session. If patients are reluctant to see their weight, 
desensitization to seeing the number becomes part of the therapy. Homework 
is also an essential part of the treatment, and patients must understand from 
the outset that there will be goals and tasks to practice at home, such as increas-
ing the number of meals, increasing their calories and nutrients, and decreasing 
physical activity, which will be reviewed and problem-solved at their next ses-
sion. This homework also includes self-monitoring of all food eaten, where it is 
eaten, as well as details about one's automatic thoughts and possible triggers for 
restricting or binge eating and purging. From these records, the therapist and 
patient can work together into the second phase of treatment to identify feel-
ings, self-deprecating thoughts, and patterns of interpersonal exchanges that 
maintain the eating disorder. They can then work to establish alternative ways 
of cognitively assessing these situations so that healthier eating patterns can 
replace the dysfunctional ones, and skills for managing one's feelings and inter-
personal interactions can be implemented.
During this phase, a weight gain goal is clarified, and a meal plan is set. Col-
laboration with a nutritionist and physician is recommended to implement the 
meal plan and weight regain goals safely. The weight goal should be a range 
based on past weight history before onset of AN, as well as other health param-
eters, such as resolution of amenorrhea, if applicable. An action plan should be 
developed with the patient to identify the necessary steps to increase the likeli-
hood that the prescribed meals and snacks will be eaten. These can be used to 
problem-solve situations where patients are experiencing obstacles to enacting 
their eating plans or other homework assignments, which prevents them from 
reaching their goals (e.g., weight gain, improved social skills, decreased body 
dissatisfaction).
Thought records are used in this phase to identify and restructure cognitive 
distortions, such as "If I eat three meals a day, I will be fat and disgusting" or "If 
I go out after I have eaten, my stomach will be so bloated that everyone will 
notice." The content of these thoughts can relate to eating, body dissatisfaction, 
or everyday stressors or interpersonal problems. Modifying these thoughts and 
generating alternative responses is an ongoing process, with hope that the 
patient will continue to use this strategy even once treatment has ended. Sev-
eral behaviors are targeted with thought-restructuring exercises, including 
body checking, which can take on the form of extended periods of time pinch-
ing oneself or scrutinizing oneself in the mirror, picking at one's clothing so that 
it is not too form-fitting, and seeing if parts of one's body are touching (e.g., 
thighs) or hanging (e.g., arms or stomach). Excessive exercising is also targeted, 
with an initial moratorium on exercise until weight has approached the desired 
166 Ruggieri, McCuen-Wurst, and Allison
range. Exercise can be reintroduced at that time, with attention to rigid thoughts 
that sustain the excessive nature of exercise typically seen with AN. Finally, the 
behaviors associated with undereating, such as choosing low-fat foods, moving 
food around on the plate and cutting food into small pieces during the meal, 
and any variety of methods used to consume smaller quantities of food than 
prescribed, are addressed in this phase of treatment. The therapist would start 
with validation of how difficult it is to stop using these behaviors, followed by 
challenges to discontinue the use of these behaviors that maintain the 
psychopathology.
Once patients have approached their weight goals and they are normalizing 
eating behaviors, the last phase of treatment shifts toward deconstructing the 
schema that maintain AN. Weight restoration is typically accomplished before 
the disordered attitudes regarding body weight and shape and low self-esteem 
are significantly improved. This treatment phase focuses on identifying other 
aspects of oneself outside of shape and weight that they value, as well as longer- 
term life goals and ways in which AN is not consistent with those values and 
goals. A visual, typically a pie chart, can be used to identify one's current valu-
ation of all aspects of oneself, as well as the version of the chart that one aspires 
to without having the AN (see Figure 5.3). Further work on interpersonal 
interactions and regulation of emotions is also targeted in this phase of CBT for 
AN, such that one can increase self-efficacy and not rely on AN symptoms as 
distractors from solving problems effectively in the real world.
Therapy typically ends with sessions every other week to help patients prac-
tice and maintain their skills. Booster sessions may be scheduled as needed 
following treatment end.
Efficacy
Unfortunately, there have been relatively few studies of CBT for AN and limited 
development of the theory, perhaps because of its low prevalence and the his-
torically high dropout rates observed in treatment (Galsworthy-Francis & Allen, 
2014). In general, CBT or CBT-E for AN show significant gains in BMI, eating 
disordered attitudes and behaviors, and mood, but these outcomes are not typ-
ically significantly better than comparison treatments, such as IPT, family-based 
therapies, and specialist supportive clinical management.
With CBT for AN, BMI shows increases between 0.9 to 2.1 kg/m
2
 (e.g., from 
a BMI of 16.0 to 16.9-18.1 kg/m
2
) from baseline to treatment end (Byrne et al., 
2017; Fairburn et al., 2013; Zipfel et al., 2014). This has not been superior to the 
gains shown with specialist supportive clinical management, ranging from 1.4 
to 1.5 kg/m
2
 (e.g., from a BMI of 16.0 to 16.4-16.5 kg/m
2
; Byrne et al., 2017; 
McIntosh et al., 2005; Schmidt et al., 2015), or Maudsley model anorexia ner-
vosa treatment for adults (MANTRA), with gains ranging 1.4 to 1.8 kg/m
2
 (e.g., 
from a BMI of 16.0 to 16.4-16.8 kg/m
2
; Byrne et al., 2017; Schmidt et al., 
2015). When examining the proportion of participants who reach a BMI of 
18.5 kg/m
2
, CBT is not superior to other treatments statistically, but there seems 
Eating Disorders 167
to be more separation when using this measure, with 59% in CBT-E, 44% in 
MANTRA, and 48% in specialist supportive clinical management reaching this 
marker of weight normalization (Byrne et al., 2017).
In a systematic review of CBT for AN, Galsworthy-Francis and Allan (2014) 
included just 16 treatment studies that had been conducted between 1995 to 
2014, with only five of those being RCTs. Comparison between therapies and 
examination of long-term outcomes was difficult, they reported, due to the 
high treatment dropout rates, particularly with follow-up data. Thus, no statis-
tical comparisons across studies were reported. Galsworthy-Francis and Allan 
(2014) further confirmed that CBT often produced significant gains in BMI, 
disordered eating pathology, and some general pathology. This was not supe-
rior to results from other approaches (e.g., dietary counseling, nonspecific sup-
portive management, IPT, behavioral family therapy), but less dropout was 
observed in the CBT treatment conditions in four of seven controlled studies, 
particularly as compared with inpatient treatment and nutritional counseling. 
They also suggested that one reason CBT does not perform significantly better 
than other approaches with AN could be that the large amount of psychoedu-
cation and use of cognitive skills, such as thought restructuring, may be too 
difficult in light of the cognitive rigidity associated with starvation in this disor-
der. However, it appears that CBT for patients with severe and enduring AN 
(duration of more than 7 years) show similar outcomes as patients who do 
have this high level of impairment and disability (Calugi et al., 2017). Calugi et 
al. (2017) reported that among 66 inpatients, 44% of the nonsevere (
n
 = 34) 
and 41% of the severe (
n
 = 32) groups reached BMIs greater than 18.5 kg/m
2
, 
indicating a weight in the "normal" range, with 32% and 33%, respectively, 
having minimal eating disorder pathology at a 12-month follow-up.
Overall, the data are not convincing that CBT for AN is superior to other 
treatments, but it also is not inferior to other treatments. It may be more 
FIGURE 5.3.
 Visualization of Current Versus Desired Self-Schema in a Patient With 
Anorexia Nervosa
168 Ruggieri, McCuen-Wurst, and Allison
acceptable to patients, as evidenced by slightly lower treatment dropout rates 
(Galsworthy-Francis & Allan, 2014), so it certainly remains one of the best 
options available at this time for adults with AN.
Mechanisms of Change
CBT for AN first targets weight regain so that rigidity of thinking is reduced and 
the substance of treatment, such as modifying dysfunctional thoughts regard-
ing overvaluation of weight and shape and extreme restraint of eating, can 
ensue. As specific examples of triggers and eating disordered attitudes and 
behaviors are modified and skills are taught for generating alternative responses, 
the underlying schema (i.e., one's framework for conceptualizing oneself and 
one's view of the world) of what the individual values and strives for in life can 
shift from control of one's body weight and shape to more varied and produc-
tive goals. These mechanisms are hypothesized based on the cognitive theory 
of eating disorders (Fairburn, 2017; Fairburn et al., 2008). More data are 
needed to confirm these pathways.
Special Considerations With This Population
Outpatient care for patients presenting with very low BMI (below 17 kg/m
2
) 
would typically be contraindicated. A full assessment of medical stability and 
safety should be undertaken in conjunction with a physician to determine the 
appropriate level of care in these cases (e.g., hospitalization or partial hospital-
ization; NICE, 2017).
Application to Diverse Populations
As Galsworthy-Francis and Allan (2014) commented in their review, most 
studies of CBT for AN did not report race or ethnicity, let alone the impact of 
age, sexual orientation, or gender identity (most studies report over 90% of 
participants are women). It is unclear how these factors may impact CBT out-
comes for AN.
NIGHT-EATING SYNDROME

Underlying Theory
The core feature of NES is that the typical daytime pattern of food intake is 
delayed, which interrupts the normal diurnal sleep-wake cycle. Persons with 
NES feel compelled to eat to fall asleep initially or to fall back to sleep during 
the night. NES is conceptualized as an eating disorder with features of sleep 
(insomnia) and mood (depressive) symptoms. Thus, CBT was adapted for NES 
based on the approaches for each of these disorders.
Allison et al. (2004) described four of the most common themes reported by 
persons with NES before their nocturnal eating episodes. These included expe-
Eating Disorders 169
riencing (a) specific food cravings (e.g., "I know that jar of peanut butter is in the 
cabinet--I can't fall back to sleep now until I have some"), (b) feeling anxious or 
agitated (e.g., "I am still worried about how my meeting at work will go tomor-
row and can't sleep, but if I eat, that will help me fall back to sleep"), (c) feeling 
the need to eat something so one's stomach feels full (e.g., "I just need to put 
something in my stomach, and then I will be able to sleep"), and (d) feeling the 
need to eat to fall back to sleep (e.g., "I will be a wreck at work tomorrow if I 
don't get back to sleep soon--I know I can fall back to sleep if I eat something, 
so that is what I will do"). Unfortunately, persons with NES often experience 
shame, disgust, and distress after nocturnal eating, particularly in the morning. 
Many describe feeling as though they have a "food hangover," causing them to 
delay their eating in the morning, thus perpetuating the cycle.
Main Procedures
As with the previously described approaches, in the first stage of CBT for NES, 
the therapist develops the therapeutic relationship, explains the rationale for 
CBT, and educates the patient on the basic techniques of CBT (Allison, 2012). 
These techniques include monitoring sleeping, eating, and mood patterns, 
along with the automatic thoughts associated with these events (Sessions 1-4). 
The 
Nighttime Eating Assessment
--which presents a series of visual analog scales 
that the patient completes before eating at night to identify mood states that 
might be triggering the urge to eat--are to be completed for the first 2 weeks of 
therapy. This exercise helps to identify other targets of therapy so that skills can 
be developed to undermine the patient's typical pattern (Allison, 2012). 
Thought records are used to construct alternative thoughts and responses to 
the urge to eat at night, and the use of social support is encouraged.
In addition to identifying the stressors and thoughts that precipitate 
unwanted eating, the patient is asked to complete food logs to detail their cir-
cadian pattern of food intake. Patients are encouraged to move their first meal 
of the day earlier (e.g., if nothing is eaten until 2:00 p.m., a lunch at noon 
would be prescribed), with successively earlier meals assigned in subsequent 
sessions. The therapist explains that although regulating the daytime eating 
schedule is not sufficient to stop the nocturnal ingestions, it is necessary to 
break the delayed pattern of eating. In addition, the therapist encourages 
behavioral experiments (i.e., homework designed to modify beliefs about the 
pros and cons of behaviors, and debunk dysfunctional thoughts that sustain 
those--usually negative--behaviors) to address the nighttime awakenings and 
ingestions, including attention to the energy and nutrient content of the snacks. 
A "kitchen is closed" time is also chosen, indicated with a verbal declaration 
and by turning the lights off. Patients are encouraged to brush their teeth and 
move to another area of the house after that time. A behavioral chain describ-
ing the specific steps in a patient's nocturnal eating episodes, along with ways 
that the patient can break the links, is also completed and given to the patient 
for reference at home.
170 Ruggieri, McCuen-Wurst, and Allison
If patients have overweight or obesity and have a desire to lose weight, cal-
orie tracking with their food log is instituted at Session 3, with typical goals of 
1,200-1,500 calories for women and 1,500-1,800 calories for men. At weights 
above 250 lb (113 kg), adjustment of these calorie goals is made accordingly. 
Clinical experience has suggested that implementing a calorie goal improves 
motivation for change and therapy compliance among those seeking treatment 
for NES, as part of their distress regarding their nighttime eating is its negative 
influence on their weight gain. Restraint and overvaluation of weight and 
shape are not as extreme in those with NES as in BED and other eating disor-
ders (Allison et al., 2005), so encouraging a structured behavioral weight loss 
component does not seem contraindicated for this disorder.
In the middle stage of CBT for NES (Sessions 5-8), the work centers on 
firmly establishing the skills that have been developed in the first phase. 
Depressed mood and dysfunctional thoughts about eating continue to be mon-
itored and addressed through the use of thought records, together with contin-
ued use of behavioral interventions. Behavioral experimentation is essential for 
decreasing the occurrence of evening and nighttime ingestions. Although the 
actual methods may differ based on the layout of the patient's house, the pres-
ence or absence of family or roommates, and what food is available, each 
approach involves stimulus control of food, including strategies such as prepar-
ing preset, portion-sized snacks and placing them on the counter or in the front 
of the refrigerator; locking or hiding away desirable food at night; or engaging 
in another activity until sleepiness returns. Thoughts regarding fear of weight 
gain and lack of hunger with regard to starting to eat earlier in the day, and 
with regular daytime meals and snacks, is also addressed. If depressed mood is 
present, these symptoms are treated with the same thought records and behav-
ioral activation/change of typical routine outlined previously. Negative beliefs 
about weight and shape, if present, are also be attended to throughout the 
therapeutic process, as these beliefs are often intricately tied to negative affect.
The final stage of therapy, Sessions 9-10, transitions to biweekly sessions. 
The therapist reviews progress and helps the individual generate possible trig-
gers for relapse. Therapists also aim to increase self-efficacy regarding the 
patient's ownership of the progress they have made, so that they can maintain 
their progress outside of the therapeutic relationship.
Efficacy
One study has tested CBT for NES, with a 10-session treatment delivered over 
12 weeks among 25 participants (Allison, Lundgren, Moore et al., 2010). Inten-
tion to treat analysis showed significant reductions in the percentage of food 
intake consumed after dinner (from 35% to 24.9%), number of weekly awak-
enings (from 13.5 to 8.5 per week), and weekly nocturnal ingestions (from 8.7 
to 2.6 per week; Allison, Lundgren, Moore, et al., 2010). Among participants 
with overweight or obesity, a 3 kg weight loss was also reported, with caloric 
reductions from 2,356 per day at Session 3 (the first time calories are tracked) 
Eating Disorders 171
to 1,759 per day at treatment end. More studies are needed to confirm these 
results.
Mechanisms of Change
CBT for NES seems to work by recalibrating an individual's temporal pattern of 
eating, such that the nocturnal drive to eat, which becomes habitual over time, 
is diminished and patients no longer feel compelled to eat, even if they con-
tinue to wake up during the night. The treatment uncouples the urge to eat 
during the night from the act of falling asleep initially or falling back to sleep, 
so that even if they have problems initiating sleep or waking during the night, 
they are able to do other soothing activities in order to resume sleep (Allison, 
2012). These mechanisms are based on the CBT theory of NES, so these path-
ways should be tested further.
Special Considerations With This Population
Some persons with NES report that their first moments of awareness do not 
occur until they are standing in front of the refrigerator, whereas others are 
fully aware from the moment they wake and rise from bed. Persons with 
reduced awareness typically are not able to identify automatic thoughts until 
they are about to eat or are already eating. Treatment of nocturnal ingestions 
focuses on increasing awareness progressively earlier in the waking process so 
that patients can access and implement the CBT skills during the nocturnal 
eating episodes. Behavioral approaches, such as placing a bell or some other 
type of alarm on the door may be used in some cases to raise awareness before 
they are even able to leave the bedroom.
Persons with NES who have normal weight seem to endorse more severe 
symptoms; a higher proportion of their intake occurs after dinner because they 
seem to be restricting more during the day than persons with overweight or 
obesity. Persons with NES who have normal weight also report higher levels of 
compulsive exercise to compensate for their nocturnal ingestions. Thus, those 
with NES with normal weight may need to pay more attention to compensa-
tory behaviors and fear of weight gain than those with higher weights (Allison, 
Lundgren, Moore, et al., 2010).
DISSEMINATION OF CBT FOR EATING DISORDERS
CBT has been evaluated through numerous RCTs and is regarded as the "gold 
standard" treatment for BN and BED, but there remains limited access to effec-
tive, evidence-based versions of this treatment. Some barriers include the avail-
ability of resources, namely doctoral-level therapists, inadequate training for 
therapists, and lack of competence and consistency in adhering to the treat-
ment protocol (Fairburn & Wilson, 2013). Therefore, efforts to address these 
172 Ruggieri, McCuen-Wurst, and Allison
barriers are pivotal in the transfer from evidence-based research to clinical prac-
tice. Self-help or guided self-help using evidence-based treatment manuals are 
also valuable in disseminating these treatments (Peterson et al., 2009). The pri-
mary manual for self-help CBT, developed by Fairburn (2013), includes infor-
mation about the disorder and manualized instructions for implementation of 
treatment.
Given the severity of AN, professional help is typically recommended. CBT 
and CBT-E trainings are offered through the Centre for Research on Eating 
Disorders at Oxford (CREDO, https://www.credo-oxford.com), and profes-
sional conferences, such as the Academy for Eating Disorders (https://www.
AEDweb.org), can be valuable tools for therapists to learn this treatment. There 
are few self-help CBT treatments for AN, with little outcome data currently 
available.
Much work is needed to disseminate CBT for NES given it is not well- 
recognized (Goncalves et al., 2009). A self-help book is available (Allison et al., 
2004), as well as a treatment manual (Allison, 2012).
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
CBT is the first-line treatment recommended for both BN and BED. The evi-
dence is less clear for the treatment of AN, as CBT reduces symptoms but is not 
superior to other therapies. Even though it is the most commonly recom-
mended therapy for BN and BED, the proportion of those patients who enter 
remission with treatment typically ranges between 50% and 60%, leaving a 
need for other therapies, given the large minority of patients whose symptoms 
persist. Accessing treatment can be difficult, however, so it is important to note 
that self-help manuals may be helpful, particularly in milder cases of BN and 
BED. More work is needed to validate treatments for purging disorder and NES.
