7
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000166-008
Emotion-Focused Family Therapy: A Transdiagnostic Model for Caregiver-Focused 
Interventions
, by A. Lafrance, K. A. Henderson, and S. Mayman
Copyright (c) 2020 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
EMOTION-FOCUSED FAMILY 

THERAPY FOR EATING 

DISORDERS
Managing family life can be difficult enough without the added stress of  
supporting a child with an eating disorder. Developing the ability to notice 
and respond appropriately to emotions--hers and my own--has diffused 
many stressful situations at the dinner table. It's truly making the difference 
in her recovery.
--Caregiver
Eating disorders (EDs) are debilitating illnesses that are associated with the 
highest mortality rate of all mental disorders (Arcelus, Mitchell, Wales, & 
Nielsen, 2011). In the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(5th ed.; American Psychiatric Association, 2013) and the International Clas-
sification of Diseases (World Health Organization, 2018), a number of feed-
ing and EDs are listed, including anorexia nervosa (AN), bulimia nervosa 
(BN), and binge eating disorder (BED). These disorders are characterized 
by problematic patterns of food intake, low self-esteem and poor or dis-
torted body image (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). EDs are also 
 * Emotion-Focused Family Therapy
highly comorbid with mood and anxiety disorders, as well as substance mis-
use (Hudson, Hiripi, Pope, & Kessler, 2007). The lifetime prevalence of EDs 
is 0.9% for AN; 1.5% BN; and 2.8% for BED in women and 0.3%, 0.5%, and 
0.2%, respectively, in men (Hudson, Hiripi, Pope, & Kessler, 2007).
EDs are known to affect every system of the body (Katzman & Findlay, 
2011; Mehler, 2018), and the course of the illness can negatively impact 
one's emotional, cognitive, and social development (Klump, Bulik, Kaye, 
Treasure, & Tyson, 2009). Although various interventions have been used 
to treat adolescent and adult EDs with varied levels of success, many indi-
viduals affected do not respond to existing therapies, and relapse rates are 
high (Halmi, 2009, 2013; Hay, Touyz, & Sud, 2012; Zipfel et al., 2014). 
For these reasons, novel treatment and adaptations to existing treatments 
are required (Halmi, 2013). As mentioned in the Introduction to this book, 
emotion-focused family therapy (EFFT) was developed in response to this 
need, first as an adjunct to family-based treatment for children and adoles-
cents with EDs (Lafrance Robinson, Dolhanty, & Greenberg, 2015) and later 
as a stand-alone treatment for EDs across the lifespan (Stillar et al., 2016). 
As such, the application of EFFT is far more nuanced in this treatment con-
text, and therefore, we dedicate this chapter to highlighting its use in EDs. 
In addition, readers are encouraged to view the following as a detailed and 
integrated example of the application of EFFT. The lessons we've learned by 
treating individuals with eating disorders, such as the importance of care-
giver involvement, the role of emotion processing in the development and 
maintenance of mental illness, and the way in which illness severity can 
increase the likelihood of emotional blocks, are easily applicable across other 
mental health disorders. It is what EDs have in common with other mental 
health disorders, rather than the differences that exist between them, that 
has allowed for such a rapid expansion of EFFT transdiagnostically.
HISTORY OF FAMILY INVOLVEMENT IN EDS
Historically, family factors have been regarded as causal in the develop-
ment of EDs. For instance, family enmeshment, an emotional style char-
acterized by a lack of personal and emotional boundaries, was often cited 
as a problem within families of affected individuals (Haworth-Hoeppner, 
2000; Minuchin, 1970). In line with this conceptualization of illness, paren-
tal blame was a common practice among professionals and treatment fre-
quently involved increasing ED patients' individuation from their families. At 
its extreme, parents were excluded from treatment or separated from their 
EFFT for Eating Disorders * 
121
child for extended periods of time (Munn, Smeltzer, Smeltzer, & Westin, 
2010). These practices came to be referred to as 
parentectomies
 (Harper, 
1983). Now various lines of research have confirmed that EDs can develop 
in a wide range of family contexts and that there is no specific family style 
that predicts their development (Le Grange, Lock, Loeb, & Nicholls, 2010). 
In fact, some of the problematic patterns of behavior observed within fami-
lies of an affected child are now understood as reactions to the presence of a 
life-threatening and often chronic illness (Whitney & Eisler, 2009).
ED treatment that excludes families (parents, spouses, other caregivers)  
does not reflect the reality of the lives of many of those suffering. Many 
individuals with EDs are tightly connected to, and often dependent on, 
their families. Children, adolescents, and adults with chronic EDs are often 
delayed in their social or emotional development (or both), which results 
in needs that differ from their peers. Finally, ED families experience con-
siderable strain as a result of their loved one's illness and can benefit from 
support to disentangle themselves from the effects of the ED. Families 
also provide an opportunity to extend treatment efforts beyond the office 
to effect lasting behavioral and emotional change. As such, in contrast to 
previous practices, and with the support of parent advocate groups such 
as F.E.A.S.T (Families Empowered and Supporting Treatment of Eating 
Disorders), contemporary approaches to ED treatment have evolved to 
include families as active supports in the recovery process. Recent research 
outcomes have demonstrated the benefits of carer involvement, including 
improved outcomes for both those with an ED and their family members 
(Couturier, Kimber, & Szatmari, 2013; Goddard, Macdonald, & Treasure,  
2011; Lafrance Robinson, Dolhanty, Stillar, Henderson, & Mayman, 2016). 
The most well-known of these family-oriented treatment protocols include 
family-based treatment (Lock & Le Grange, 2015), the New Maudsley  
method (Treasure, Schmidt, & Macdonald, 2010), and EFFT for EDs (Lafrance 
Robinson et al., 2016).
FAMILY INVOLVEMENT IN ED TREATMENT
Family-based treatment (Lock & Le Grange, 2015) is the most widely 
accepted outpatient family therapy for child and adolescent EDs. It has 
the most research evidence and has been adapted to more intensive levels 
of care (e.g., day treatment; Girz, Robinson, Foroughe, Jasper, & Boachie, 
2013) and extended beyond childhood and adolescence to support transition 
age youth (Dimitropoulos et al., 2015, 2018). In its standard form, family- 
122
 * Emotion-Focused Family Therapy
based treatment is a manualized treatment that involves three phases of 
treatment. Throughout each phase, clinicians and caregivers work together 
as a multidisciplinary team (Lock & Le Grange, 2015; Lock, Le Grange, 
Agras, & Dare, 2000). In the first phase of treatment, clinicians focus on 
empowering carers to take action against their child's ED through a focus on 
renourishment and symptom interruption in the home setting (Lock et al., 
2000). Following steady weight gain and symptom management, clinicians 
support caregivers to work toward returning control over eating to their 
child in a developmentally appropriate manner, while maintaining a focus 
on their physical health. It is also in this second phase that previously set-
aside adolescent issues (e.g., puberty, peers, sexuality) thought to influence 
symptoms are reintroduced into the therapy. Finally, in the third phase of 
treatment, the team reviews central issues of adolescence, including the 
development of age-appropriate autonomy, the development of appropriate 
parental boundaries, and the need for the parents to refocus their caregiving 
roles in response to their child's evolving needs.
Although the involvement of caregivers in the treatment of children and 
adolescents has become standard practice, adult interventions are most often 
individually focused. The New Maudsley method is a noteworthy excep-
tion in that carers are systematically recruited as partners in care across 
the lifespan (Treasure, Schmidt, & Macdonald, 2010). Rooted in part in  
the cognitive interpersonal maintenance model (Goddard, Macdonald, 
Sepulveda, et al., 2011; Schmidt & Treasure, 2006; Treasure & Schmidt, 
2013), the New Maudsley method uses psychoeducation to support caregivers 
to identify and transform potential maintenance patterns or traits. Carers are 
also taught 
collaborative care skills
, including the principles and techniques 
of motivational interviewing, to support change in their loved one. The New 
Maudsley method also takes into consideration the developmental stage of 
the affected individual to determine the specifics of carer involvement.
EFFT FOR EDS
It is in part thanks to the developers of family-based treatment and the New 
Maudsley method that caregivers are now being recruited as treatment 
allies, closing the book on parentectomies. These treatment models brought 
essential and novel approaches to the treatment of EDs and were quickly 
integrated into clinical programs around the world. EFFT was designed to 
build on the strengths of these approaches and introduce additional com-
ponents that could benefit sufferers, caregivers, and clinicians. For exam-
ple, the spirit of Phase 1 of family-based treatment is integrated within the 
EFFT for Eating Disorders * 
123
behavior-coaching module in that caregivers are empowered to support the 
normalization of eating patterns and interrupt ED symptoms. The animal 
metaphors from the New Maudsley method are incorporated to assist care-
givers in the identification of problematic patterns of responses to their loved 
one's symptoms. Throughout treatment, caregivers are also provided with 
skills training, and the role of emotion is brought to the forefront with a focus 
on emotion coaching, therapeutic apologies, and the processing of caregiver 
and clinician emotion blocks. We believe that EFFT's emphasis on core emo-
tional and relational processes and its transdiagnostic application across 
the lifespan represent important contributions to the developing field of ED 
treatment. We urge readers to note, however, that, similar to other models 
of ED treatment, the EFFT clinician or therapist is not meant to act as a sole 
treatment provider but rather a member of a multidisciplinary team that, at 
minimum, includes a medical professional and other allied health and men-
tal practitioners such as a psychiatrist, dietitian, occupational therapist, and 
others, if relevant.
Caregiver Psychoeducation and Empowerment
Before introducing the modules of EFFT, carers are first provided with psy-
choeducation on a number of ED-related topics including their causes (e.g., 
an interplay of risks and stressors, including genetics, temperamental fac-
tors, patterns of emotional avoidance, life stressors, sociocultural factors), 
functions (coping, emotional avoidance), and consequences (physical, psy-
chological, social). Although a full discussion of the psychoeducational con-
tent is beyond the scope of this chapter, caregivers should come away with 
the understanding that although EDs are seemingly about food, weight, and 
shape, they are complex disorders that serve many functions, one of which 
is to regulate stress and distress. Our clients with EDs frequently describe 
the manner in which their symptoms serve to mask and numb their feel-
ings. When they resist the temptation to engage in symptoms, many report 
experiencing a surge of overwhelming emotion. We therefore encourage 
caregivers to conceptualize EDs as emotion management disorders, where 
starving numbs, bingeing soothes, and purging provides relief (Dolhanty & 
Greenberg, 2007).
We also liken symptoms to 
emotion converters
. Whether consciously or 
not, individuals with EDs convert the experience of emotions such as fear, 
anger, sadness, and shame to "feeling fat" or to urges to binge, purge, or 
overexercise. It is as though the narrow focus on weight, shape, and food 
converts painful emotions into a bodily experience that sufferers can then 
manage with symptoms. It is for these reasons that we are firm in our belief 
124
 * Emotion-Focused Family Therapy
that ED recovery should involve equal emphasis on symptom management 
and support to build capacity in the processing of emotions. As such, care-
givers are empowered to take on an active role in their loved one's recovery 
by increasing their involvement in behavior coaching and emotion coach-
ing, including a therapeutic apology if warranted. Given that each of these 
modules are explained in detail in previous chapters, special considerations 
related to the application of these modules in the context of EDs are high-
lighted, along with clinical illustrations.
Behavior Coaching
The value of behavior coaching in EDs cannot be overemphasized. A basic 
underlying principle of this module, and one that is borrowed from family- 
based treatment (Lock & Le Grange, 2015), is that for an individual strug-
gling with an ED, food is medicine. Nutrition is essential to prevent, reduce, 
or reverse medical complications and to support normal cognitive and emo-
tional functioning. If necessary, carers are informed that ED symptoms can 
be difficult to give up and can prove fatal over time (Reijonen, Pratt, Patel, 
& Greydanus, 2003; Von Holle et al., 2008) to help mobilize them to regard 
food as medicine.
1
 The behavior-coaching module of EFFT thus involves 
equipping caregivers with practical meal-support strategies, as well as spe-
cific tools to support the interruption of behaviors such as purging, bingeing, 
and compulsive exercising. Caregivers engage in this "training" in individual 
or group settings, as if they were clinical staff newly hired in an ED program. 
The material is delivered using the same methods and techniques used to 
train hospital staff around the world.
Meal Support
Meal support
 refers to the act of offering structure, encouragement, and 
reassurance to an individual completing a snack or meal. It is an incred-
ibly valuable intervention during the renourishment phase of treatment, 
especially if the affected individual's fear of weight gain is intense, and the 
temptation to restrict or engage in symptoms is strong. In many cases, meal 
1
It is important to inform caregivers of loved ones who have eaten very little over 
a long period of time that there could be a risk of developing 
refeeding syndrome
, 
a potentially fatal condition in medically compromised individuals. If increases in 
nutrition occur too rapidly, electrolyte levels such as phosphorous, magnesium, 
and calcium can drop and cause cardiac, respiratory, or circulatory system 
failures (Boachie & Jasper, 2011). Thus, it is critical that increases occur slowly 
and incrementally and with the support of a physician in a position to monitor 
medical stability and needs.
EFFT for Eating Disorders * 
125
support can also alleviate the guilt that individuals working toward recovery 
often experience in response to their harsh inner critic or ED voice. In other 
words, the involvement of others can serve as a distraction from their critic 
or allow the individual with ED to eat because they "have to." In its most 
structured form, carers are involved in preparing and serving meals, includ-
ing making decisions about the amount and variety of food consumed. That 
being said, this degree of structure may not be possible for all caregivers or 
appropriate for all individuals with EDs. As such, in EFFT, the specifics of 
meal support are developed according to the loved one's chronological and 
developmental age, stage of illness, and individual circumstances, as well as 
the needs of the individual's caregivers. For example, caregivers of children 
or adolescents will be supported to take responsibility for supervision and 
support during all meals, while caregivers of adults who live away may visit 
for extended periods of time to offer support or provide meal support via 
video calls. Regardless of the approach, clinicians should work collabora-
tively with the family to find ways to help make meals go as smoothly as 
possible, encouraging them to draw on their caregiving instincts to inform 
implementation. Following is an example of such an exchange between a 
clinician and carer:
CLINICIAN: 
 So, you're telling me that you're struggling right now with get-
ting your daughter to complete her meals. What do you think 
you could change in your approach to help her to eat more?
CARER: 
Well the eating is so slow, and she seems to take forever. It's like 
she's not even there during the meal. She's so shut down, and I 
can tell she's in pain.
CLINICIAN: 
 Of course, it would be hard to push when you see her hurting. 
I'm wondering if there is anything you could do make the meals 
a bit easier on her without reducing the amount of food she's 
expected to eat?
CARER: 
Maybe if she had some distraction . . .
CLINICIAN: 
 Distraction can be a great way to reduce distress during meals. 
Any ideas about what might work best for your daughter?
CARER: 
She used to love documentaries. We used to watch them together 
all the time. Maybe we can watch TV during meals for a while, 
to get her mind off the pain.
CLINICIAN: 
 That's a great idea. Anything else that you think might be  
helpful?
126
 * Emotion-Focused Family Therapy
CARER: 
I don't know . . . I guess I keep thinking back to when she was 
little and felt sick. She always asked me to rub her back, and 
it made her feel better. But she's a bit old for that, and things 
have been pretty tense between us.
CLINICIAN: 
 So you're thinking this could be soothing for her. But it sounds 
like your gut is also telling you that you might want to check with 
her to see if that kind of comfort could be welcome right now.
CARER: 
Yeah, it might be worth asking . . . There are times when she 
doesn't want to be touched, but not always. Maybe I could 
invite her to snuggle on the couch as a start, until the worst of 
it passes.
In this example, the clinician takes care to remind the caregiver of the 
need for her loved one to increase her caloric intake, while encouraging her 
to draw on her instincts to individualize the support according to her daugh-
ter's unique needs. This collaborative approach instills confidence in the 
caregivers and serves to recognize the expertise of all members of the treat-
ment team. Should the caregivers struggle to identify possible solutions to 
the challenges they face, the EFFT clinician offers suggestions from which to 
choose based on the successes of other families with whom they've worked.
Finally, when supporting a loved one to gain weight, caregivers are 
encouraged to work on the goals of increasing both the amount and variety 
of foods consumed. Caregivers must also have a clear understanding of 
the loved one's "safe" and "scary foods" to work on increasing intake while 
also reintroducing feared foods. These include those deemed by their loved 
one as "unhealthy," as research suggests that relapse is more likely when 
individuals follow a diet limited in variety (Schebendach et al., 2008). To 
do so, caregivers and their loved ones can work together to develop a fear 
hierarchy, similar to a process of graduated exposure used to treat spe-
cific phobias (Kendall, 1994). Caregivers support the expansion of variety 
by introducing the least feared foods and moving up to the most feared 
foods. This allows the affected individual to systematically extinguish fears 
and develop a more neutral relationship with food. They do the same with 
respect to eating in front of others, and in different settings, such as at school 
or in restaurants. Thus, the overarching goal of this phase is to support care-
givers to support their loved one to eat without rigid rules about what, when, 
and how to eat (Satter, 2000).
Bingeing
Episodes of bingeing will naturally decrease in frequency when caregivers 
encourage the intake of regular meals throughout the day. Eating food at 
EFFT for Eating Disorders * 
127
regular intervals stabilizes blood sugar levels and lessens the urge to eat in a 
chaotic or uncontrolled way. "Trigger" foods can be identified and removed 
from the loved one's home, knowing that these will need to be reintroduced 
later in treatment so that normalized eating can occur. Caregivers can also 
decrease opportunities for bingeing via contact and connection during 
the times of the day when their loved one feels most vulnerable. In these 
moments, caregivers can support loved ones to use skills such as urge surf-
ing and distraction techniques to manage impulses to binge.
Purging
Individuals with EDs who purge will greatly benefit from the support of 
others to break the cycle of behavior, whether they purge through vomit-
ing or other methods. The most common form of behavioral support for 
purging involves supervision postmeals, including supervision of bathroom 
use for up to 2 hours. Supervision is usually coupled with support around 
the management of urges, including efforts to distract the loved one from 
associated distress. This type of support is best offered in person, although 
many carers have reported great success using telephone or video calls and 
text messages.
Caregivers should also be made aware that purging through vomiting 
can occur in other areas (e.g., in showers and garbage bins), and they are 
encouraged to remain vigilant of these possibilities. When discussing and 
addressing purging symptoms, caregivers are guided to maintain a neutral 
yet supportive stance to create an open line of communication. It is also 
important to note that individuals who have never purged but who are in 
the process of being renourished can be at higher risk of 
symptom shifting
, 
especially if they are in distress and desperate for relief. (Symptom shifting 
refers to a process in which individuals shift their pattern of symptoms--for 
example, from food restriction to bingeing and purging.)
Problematic Patterns of Exercise
Individuals with EDs who overexercise can put themselves at risk for seri-
ous medical issues. These complications can include electrolyte imbalances, 
injuries, and cardiac events (Attia, 2010). Excessive exercise is also associ-
ated with longer treatment duration (Solenberger, 2001). As a result, care-
givers of individuals who are medically unstable, underweight, or engaged 
in compulsive patterns of exercise are guided to support their loved one to 
cease or reduce physical activity for a period of time. Caregivers may need 
to provide supervision and distraction in places and at times when the urges 
to exercise are strongest and be aware of other forms of "activity" that may 
be occurring (e.g., leg shaking, stomach crunches, and any other excessive 
128
 * Emotion-Focused Family Therapy
movement aimed at burning calories) as these may significantly affect health 
and weight. Once the return to physical activity has been deemed medically 
and psychologically safe, caregivers can support their loved one to resume 
engagement in activities in a way that is separate from the influence of the 
ED. This might mean that caregivers help their loved ones to participate in 
new lower risk activities and support them to increase their compensatory 
nutritional intake, as appropriate.
The Role of Intensive Treatment
Although carers can support their loved one in the home setting as part of 
outpatient treatment, there are times when their loved one may require a 
more contained and intensive therapeutic environment due to the severity 
of the illness or the need for medical monitoring. In these cases, caregivers 
may need to focus on supporting their loved one to navigate an admission 
to hospital as a behavioral coaching task. The EFFT clinician may also advo-
cate on behalf of the caregivers to be involved in the partial hospitalization, 
inpatient, or residential treatment in some way. If this is not possible, EFFT 
clinicians urge caregivers to recognize the importance of their role leading 
up to admission and postdischarge. They may also seek the support of an 
EFFT clinician while their loved one is in treatment to better prepare for the 
transition to the home environment.
In addition to the techniques already described, several publicly available 
resources can further inform caregivers' efforts to support their loved one's 
behavioral recovery from an ED (see Appendix N). Regardless of the strat-
egies employed, caregivers are guided to move flexibly between empathy 
and encouragement, compassion and firmness, validation and limit-setting 
when providing meal support and working to interrupt symptoms. To do 
so, care givers are also equipped with the skills of emotion coaching to 
respond to emotions that often arise during the renourishment and symp-
tom interruption phase in a way that is loving and productive. In other 
words, these modules work together to increase the effectiveness of the 
behavioral interventions.
Emotion Coaching
There are multiple ways in which emotion coaching can enhance the recov-
ery process for individuals with EDs and their families. As stated in Chap-
ter 2, this volume, this emotion-coaching framework can lead to increases 
in cognitive flexibility and connection. Therefore, when caregivers attend 
to their loved one in this way, possible outcomes include a decrease in 
EFFT for Eating Disorders * 
129
resistance to ED interventions (including resistance to having their family 
involved in structured ways) and an increase in the effectiveness of care-
giver-led interventions (meal support and the interruption of symptoms). 
It can also promote a strengthening of the caregiver-loved one relationship, 
making it more likely that the loved one will seek out the caregiver for  
support. Most importantly, however, emotion-coaching serves to facilitate 
the internalization of emotion-processing skills among those with an ED,  
making it easier for them to resist the temptation to engage in symptoms 
when experiencing distress. We next describe some of the more practical 
uses of emotion coaching in the context of EFFT for EDs.
Emotion Coaching and Caregiver Involvement
When carers can empathize and connect with their loved ones' pain and 
validate their experiences, including their resistance to intervention and 
support, loved ones will be more likely to trust and accept the support 
offered by their caregivers. This style of emotional support can also serve 
as a powerful buffer against an angry ED voice "warning" sufferers not to 
believe in those trying to help them in their recovery. Among adult clients, 
resistance to caregiver involvement may be particularly strong because the 
level of support required often feels developmentally awkward and generates 
feelings of shame and resentment. Following is an illustration of the power 
of emotion coaching based on a real-life example of its use in the context of 
adult ED treatment.
LOVED ONE: 
 I don't want your help, and I don't need it. Please just leave 
me alone.
CAREGIVER: 
 I don't blame you for not wanting my help. You don't want me 
to see you hurting, and I can only imagine how much shame 
you must feel that I even know about what's going on.
LOVED ONE: 
 Seriously, I'm fine, it's going to be fine, and I can figure this 
out myself.
CAREGIVER: 
 I believe you will be fine. But I also believe that you don't 
want my help because you're afraid that I will think less of 
you.
LOVED ONE: 
 No--that's not it. I know you love me, but I also know that 
you're already stressed out with your own life. We both know 
your health isn't great, and there's no chance I am going to put 
even more stress on you. I could never live with myself if you 
had another heart attack.
130
 * Emotion-Focused Family Therapy
CAREGIVER: 
 Okay, I get it now. I can understand you wouldn't want to be 
burdened with the guilt if something happened to me. And so 
I don't blame you for trying to push your mom and me away. 
I didn't realize why until now, and the truth is, I would prob-
ably feel the same way if I were you. That being said, I am 
your dad and I can't stand on the sidelines knowing you are 
struggling. That would be far worse. Let me make you a prom-
ise. I promise that if I feel stressed or worn down, I will take 
a break to take care of myself. I will even schedule an extra 
appointment with the cardiologist to reassure you. Sound like 
a plan?
LOVED ONE: 
 Fine. As long as you keep your promise and we revisit the 
terms every once in a while.
This exchange illustrates the ways in which the spirit of emotion coaching 
can serve to decrease resistance to support, even when caregivers' attempts 
to validate their loved one miss the mark. In fact, inspired attempts, regard-
less of their accuracy, can convey to loved ones that their caregivers are 
invested in understanding their perspective, thereby increasing the overall 
trust between carers and those with an ED. This increased trust and connec-
tion often helps loved ones to reveal the fears and motives underlying their 
treatment refusal or hesitation to involve caregivers in treatment, creating 
openings for a new path forward.
Emotion Coaching for Meal Support and Symptom Interruption
It is not unusual in the early phases of treatment for loved ones to react to 
meal support and symptom interruption with uncharacteristic displays of 
despondence, anxiety, anger, and even violence. We have heard too many 
reports from parents who described that when they insisted that their child 
complete a meal, plates went flying. They were not prepared to respond to 
this level of anger and anguish. As such, it is vital that clinicians teach care-
givers emotion coaching strategies so that they can respond effectively to 
their loved one's reactions that surface before, during, or after meal times. 
Here is an example of emotion coaching in the context of meal support.
LOVED ONE
:
 (points to a slice of cake) There is no way I am eating that.
CAREGIVER: 
 I thought you might say that. When I put myself in your shoes, 
I had the exact same thought. You haven't eaten a pastry in 
ages, and I can imagine that you'd feel terrified of overdoing 
it. The fear of bingeing is so strong. It feels too risky to even 
try one bite.
EFFT for Eating Disorders * 
131
LOVED ONE: 
 I'm serious. There's no chance. I don't ever want to be fat ever 
again. Don't make me eat this. It's not even healthy.
CAREGIVER: 
 I'm sorry, honey. I understand now how scary it was when 
things were out of control. I don't blame you for feeling ner-
vous. You've been in this pattern for so long. Remember, you 
have my support. I will be with you for every bite, and I will 
stay with you until the urges for symptoms pass. Let's start 
with the first one.
Collectively, we have more than 40 years of experience working on the 
front line of ED treatment, providing meal support to people in inpatient 
and partial hospitalization settings, and supervising other clinicians to 
do the same. We also have years of experience supporting caregivers of 
children, adolescents, and adults with EDs in the context of family-based 
treatment and EFFT. Although we acknowledge that emotion coaching 
does not yield the desired outcomes 100% of the time, we can say with 
conviction that, in our experience, this technique is by far the most effec-
tive strategy to support sufferers to "eat one more bite." It is a tool we 
hope will be used more often, and as an alternative to some of the more 
coercive or punitive practices sometimes employed out of desperation. 
Although we are in support of firm limits, we believe they must be coupled 
with the steps of emotion coaching to maximize the effectiveness of meal 
support and symptom interruption strategies and to minimize distress 
for all involved.
Emotion Coaching for Cognitive Symptoms of EDs
We have found that for clinicians and carers alike, it can be extremely dif-
ficult to resist the urge to reassure, correct with logic, or ignore ED-related 
comments. Individuals with EDs often express the desire to be sick, to never 
eat again, or even to die. These statements are incredibly hard to validate 
for caregivers because they can provoke strong fear reactions. When sup-
porting caregivers to respond to these types of statements, it is important 
to underline that validation is separate from agreement. Using the struc-
ture of emotion coaching, caregivers might respond to their loved one who 
expresses a wish to remain ill forever in the following way:
Of course you want to be sick. Everything inside you tells you that being sick 
makes it so that you are deserving of our affection. I can imagine that you'd be 
terrified to be well again, just in case you lost our love and support.
Although their loved one's pain won't be resolved, the validation efforts 
will make it so that they are more receptive to support, whether emotional 
132
 * Emotion-Focused Family Therapy
(e.g., reassurance) or practical (e.g., setting limits regarding the completion 
of a meal).
Carers can also use the steps of emotion coaching to respond to loved 
one's expression of body image disturbances, whether the loved one is 
emaciated, in the normal weight range, overweight, or obese. The follow-
ing illustrates a possible exchange between a woman struggling with an 
ED and her husband:
MICHELLE:
 I'm not going out today. I feel so gross. I can't show anyone this 
fat, disgusting body.
AHMED: 
I can only imagine how hard it is to feel so uncomfortable in 
your own body. Like you want to climb out of your own skin to 
escape the feeling. I could see how you might feel like there's 
something wrong with you or that you might feel scared about 
how others might see you.
MICHELLE: 
 Yes! I don't want to go!
AHMED: 
I get it. The eating disorder is convincing. It must be so heavy 
to have to carry that burden all day, every day. It sounds 
exhausting.
MICHELLE: 
 It is exhausting. I am exhausted, and I just don't know who to 
trust.
AHMED: 
No wonder you feel conflicted. I know we can get through this 
feeling together. I'll tell you what, why don't we snuggle up on 
the couch and watch a show, and we'll try again in 30 minutes. 
Let's take some pressure off of you.
MICHELLE: 
 Okay. Thanks, love.
Although it takes practice, this type of exchange will be far more effec-
tive than typical responses to "I feel/look/am fat," which usually involve 
reassurance or attempts to correct the individual's experience of her or his 
self. We remind carers that in EFFT, "fat is a feeling" and a projection of 
negative affect onto the body. Therefore, the caregiver is guided to attend 
to the loved one's surface feelings (e.g., feeling fat), followed by the vali-
dation of deeper experiences of vulnerability or emotional pain.
Therapeutic Apologies
As discussed in Chapter 4, therapeutic apologies is a module in EFFT that 
is applicable when self-blame is high in either the sufferer or the caregiver. 
EFFT for Eating Disorders * 
133
Individuals with EDs typically report an extremely strong self-critic making 
this intervention especially relevant. The ED self-critic often takes the form 
of a powerful, even abusive, internal voice (Dolhanty & Greenberg, 2007) 
that convinces sufferers that they are fat, ugly, and unworthy--and, in more 
extreme cases, that they are better off dead. The intensely negative emo-
tions that result serves to fuel the guilt and shame so many sufferers already 
experience for the pain "they are causing their family." Many sufferers blame 
themselves for having developed the ED in the first place, especially if they 
recall a turning point in their lives when they "chose" to restrict or purge  
the first time. In these instances, a therapeutic caregiver-led apology 
can be used for lifting this self-blame to reduce its impact on help-seeking 
behaviors and treatment progress.
We also encourage the use of this intervention as a means of strengthen-
ing the carer-loved one relationship. Whether or not the relationship is or 
has been under strain, doing so will maximize the healing power of caregiv-
ers' supportive efforts. As readers will have noted several times throughout 
this manual, EFFT uses the relationship between carers and their loved ones 
as a vehicle to effect change. The stronger the relationship, the more impact-
ful caregivers' efforts will be and the more their loved one will benefit from 
the carers' behavioral and emotional support. In light of the extent to which 
EDs are known to be treatment-resistant, we believe that it is worthwhile 
to invest in strengthening even the healthiest of relationships to optimize 
the healing potential of caregiver-led interventions in the various domains 
of recovery.
Although this module is powerful in the treatment of EDs, we do cau-
tion the EFFT clinician to take great care with its implementation. We have 
observed high levels of self-blame in many parents of children with EDs 
(Stillar et al., 2016). This propensity for caregiver self-blame is due in 
part to a long history of parent blaming within the ED field, which may 
still influence professionals and families today. Additionally, EDs usually 
develop and flourish in secrecy, often leaving caregivers feeling shame 
about not having noticed the early signs of illness progression. Others may 
have encouraged "clean" eating, influenced by a culture flooded with mes-
sages about "health," and therefore feel responsible for their loved one's 
obsession with food and weight. This is especially true when caregivers 
have struggled with disordered eating or an ED themselves. As such, if not 
sufficiently prepared, caregivers may respond to the proposal of a thera-
peutic apology with hurt, defensiveness, or even more self-blame. For this 
reason, and to ensure maximum therapeutic benefit, EFFT clinicians must 
take great care in conveying the spirit of no blame in which the intervention 
134
 * Emotion-Focused Family Therapy
is firmly rooted, supporting caregivers to work through any painful feelings 
that may arise. This process serves to prepare them to deliver the apology, 
as well as healing the deep roots of their own pain. In fact, and as noted in 
Chapter 4, only once carers can connect with some level of self-compassion 
and self-forgiveness for not having been "perfect" can they deliver an effec-
tive therapeutic apology delivered from their "good house." The process of 
the therapeutic apology can take time, but we've found it to be an incredibly 
worthwhile process to free both the sufferer and the caregiver from the 
grips of self-blame, among other positive outcomes.
Caregiver Blocks
Carers are often faced with the very real fear of medical complications and, 
in more extreme cases, the death of their loved one. Not surprisingly, these 
and other emotional reactions can lead caregivers to "walk on eggshells" 
or resist engagement in behavior or emotion coaching in case the distress 
causes their loved one to withdraw, reject further support, or give up on 
recovery altogether. Carers can also fall into unhelpful patterns in which 
they accommodate ED symptoms (e.g., buying low-calorie foods, avoid-
ing the reintroduction of feared foods in their loved one's diet) so as to 
avoid these feared consequences (Treasure et al., 2008). These findings 
highlight a need to identify these and other fears prior to the onset of 
caregiver-based interventions as they could lead to treatment-interfering 
behaviors and their transformation could improve outcomes. In response 
to this need, and in collaboration with parents of children struggling with 
an ED in a hospital-based program, I (AL) developed the Caregiver Traps 
Scale for Eating Disorders (CTS-ED) to assess caregiver fears specifically 
related to their involvement in providing home-based meal support and 
symptom interruption.
2
 One hundred and twenty-four parents of ado-
lescent and adult children with ED participated in a validation study to 
examine its psychometric properties (Lafrance, Strahan, & Stillar, 2019). 
Exploratory factor analysis revealed one component, and the scale yielded 
high internal consistency. The measure was positively correlated with a 
measure of accommodation and enabling of ED symptoms and negatively 
correlated with a measure of parental self-efficacy with respect to their 
helping role. Although it has been used clinically for several years, the 
results of this study confirm that the CTS-ED can be a valuable tool to 
target and transform potential fears to improve outcomes. In addition to 
2
The Caregiver Traps Scale, described in Chapter 5, was adapted from this tool.
EFFT for Eating Disorders * 
135
the CTS-ED, we recommend that ED clinicians consider integrating the 
other tools and techniques developed to transform emotion blocks outlined 
in Chapter 5, in particular, caregiver block chair work, as they too were 
initially developed for use in the context of ED treatment.
Clinician Blocks
It is well established that working as a clinician in the field of EDs can be emo-
tionally challenging (Franko & Rolfe, 1996; Golan, Yeruslavski, & Stein, 2009; 
Thompson-Brenner, Satir, Franko, & Herzog, 2012; C. S. Warren, Schafer,  
Crowley, & Olivardia, 2013). Two theoretical models have emerged that 
explore the influence of clinician factors on the delivery of ED treatment in the 
context of individual and family-oriented therapies. They include the iatro-
genic maintenance model of eating disorders (Treasure, Crane, McKnight,  
Buchanan, & Wolfe, 2011) and the therapist drift model (Kosmerly, Waller, 
& Lafrance Robinson, 2015; Tobin, Banker, Weisberg, & Bowers, 2007; 
Waller, 2009; Waller & Turner, 2016). The developers of these models posit 
that clinicians, like carers, can find themselves engaging in avoidant or 
other wise unhelpful practices when supporting individuals and their fam-
ilies (Treasure et al., 2011; Waller, Stringer, & Meyer, 2012). According 
to Waller (2009), clinicians may also resist pushing clients for behavioral 
change when it results in making the client (and, in turn, the clinician) 
uncomfortable. This can lead the clinician to engage in negotiations around 
treatment recommendations or to downplay the severity of symptoms to 
avoid conflict. Positive emotions can also hamper clinical judgment because 
they may mislead and distract from important clinical information and cues. 
For instance, clinicians may become enthusiastic about minor changes in a 
client's course of treatment, which can distract focus away from some of the 
more serious issues still requiring attention.
In 2015, ED professionals were surveyed with respect to their perception 
of the influence of emotions on clinical decisions (Lafrance Robinson & 
Kosmerly, 2015). Clinicians from various disciplines who were engaged in 
the treatment of child and adolescent EDs were randomly assigned to com-
plete one of two surveys. The first survey assessed clinician perspectives 
regarding the negative influence of emotions on their own clinical deci-
sions (
n
 = 143), and the second survey assessed clinician perspectives of 
the same with respect to their colleagues (
n
 = 145). Both groups endorsed 
this phenomenon to some degree, although participants were about twice 
as likely to endorse the negative impact of emotion among their colleagues. 
The specific treatment decisions thought to be affected fell within three 
categories: decisions regarding food and weight, decisions regarding the 
136
 * Emotion-Focused Family Therapy
involvement of the family in treatment, and decisions regarding autonomy 
and control. Decisions related to the involvement of the family were per-
ceived to be the most emotionally charged--in particular, the involvement 
of a critical or dismissive parent. Clinicians' responses indicated that cer-
tain client states and fears fueled problematic clinical practices on the part 
of the clinician (Kosmerly, 2014). Specifically, clinicians reported that the 
client states that were most likely to negatively influence their decision 
making included expressions of anger, hopelessness, and flat affect. They 
were most influenced by their own fear of potentially alienating the cli-
ent (i.e., arousing a hostile or negative emotional reaction, causing the  
family to disengage from treatment) and feelings of incompetence. Cli-
nicians reported that their most frequent reactions included focusing on 
another less emotionally arousing topic; overemphasizing minor improve-
ments in the client; and rationalizing, negotiating, or bartering with the  
client. Follow-up research was conducted among 16 family-based therapists 
who participated in a semistructured interview (Penney, 2018). Transcripts 
were analyzed using thematic analysis. Results revealed that the tone of 
therapist-client inter actions and the level of family resistance affected clin-
ical decision-making the most frequently. In fact, every one of the therapists 
shared that in response to critical or angry parents, they were more likely 
to deviate from protocol in some way, including advocating for premature 
discharge. Results also revealed that impact of therapist emotion on clinical 
decisions could be mitigated via engagement in self-reflective practices and 
working as part of a treatment team.
Common Clinician Blocks in the Treatment of EDs
We do not believe that the experiences of the clinicians and therapists 
described in this chapter are unique. In fact, when the stakes are high, as 
they are in the treatment of EDs, emotions run high as well. The emergence 
and expression of clinician blocks in these settings are normal, and ED clini-
cians are supported to increase their awareness of the potential blocks most 
common to their practice. For example, family therapists may hesitate to 
enlist caregivers as recovery allies when they present as hostile or in denial 
or when a caregiver struggles with an ED, substance use disorder, or per-
sonality disorder. Similar to the common caregiver blocks in ED treatment, 
the medical risk associated with ED symptoms can also lead clinicians to be 
blocked by a tremendous fear of losing a client to death, including being 
held responsible in some way. These blocks can lead clinicians to avoid 
working with some clients (or all clients with EDs), blame other health care 
professionals for lack of treatment progress, or adhere rigidly to treatment 
protocols.
EFFT for Eating Disorders * 
137
When a clinician's personal beliefs about food, nutrition, weight, and 
shape stand in contradiction to the central messages of ED recovery 
that "all foods fit and variety in nutrition is key" they can also interfere 
with important aspects of recovery, such as the reintegration of high- 
calorie foods. There are numerous other blocks that clinicians may  
experience in the context of ED treatment: They may perceive the indi-
vidual with the ED as manipulative rather than sick; clinicians may  
avoid bringing attention to certain ED symptoms, such as laxative use or 
bingeing or purging (to prevent from shaming the client but also because 
it can be uncomfortable to discuss the more private features of these 
symptoms); and they may hesitate to confront their clients about poten-
tially undisclosed symptoms for fear of causing offense and losing their 
trust. For these reasons, we encourage ED clinicians to maintain a routine 
of self-reflection and self-care, as well as to engage in regular supervision 
(peer or otherwise) or personal therapy to identify and work through 
blocks as they arise.
SUMMARY
Similar to EFFT for general mental health, there are three main areas of 
intervention in EFFT for ED. They include supporting carers to (a) increase 
their involvement in supporting their loved one with meal support and 
symptom interruption; (b) provide structured emotional support to respond 
to reactions that arise in response to the behavioral interventions and to 
attend to the emotional processes fueling ED symptoms; and (c) initiate a 
therapeutic apology for the healing of family wounds--whether related to 
relational injuries, the burden of self-blame, or to upgrade the relationship 
and therefore the impact of caregiver interventions. The associated skills in 
each of the modules are designed for use in person, over the telephone, or 
even by text or e-mail. Caregivers are then taught to combine these three sets 
of skills to increase their effectiveness and are provided with opportunities 
to practice in session. Should a caregiver struggle to engage in any of the 
aforementioned tasks, the EFFT clinician supports the caregiver to move 
through these impasses using the tools and techniques outlined in Chapter 5 
on caregiver blocks. Similarly, EFFT clinicians who specialize in EDs are 
also very aware of the increased vulnerability for the emergence of clinician 
blocks when working with EDs and integrate within their practice a struc-
ture for ongoing processing of potentially problematic attitudes, emotional 
reactions, or behaviors.
138
 * Emotion-Focused Family Therapy
CLINICIAN'S CORNER
I spent nearly 10 years working as a psychologist in a hospital-based pro-
gram treating children and adolescents with eating disorders. We adhered 
largely to principles of family-based treatment and I thought at the time 
that I was a clinician who believed in parents and their healing power. I felt 
as though I addressed emotion with my patients and had taught parents 
to do the same, but at times, I felt some deeper processes were lacking in 
my approach. When I first learned about EFFT, it was as though a piece of 
the puzzle that I didn't even know I was missing finally fit into the picture. 
I felt that I now had a holistic framework from which to conduct my work. 
I had practical ways of helping them understand the illness and address 
both behaviors and emotions. As I deepened my training and practice and 
went on to become a supervisor and trainer, I continued to experience the 
benefits and also the challenges of this approach. Working through my own 
blocks is not something I always look forward to, but I have never engaged 
in that work without deriving some benefit. When I left the hospital and went 
into private practice, I extended my focus to include general mental health 
issues across the lifespan. Tools and techniques from EFFT are now inte-
grated within every case I see in one way or another. I am definitely a better 
therapist today because of it.
--Psychologist
