Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Diagnostic Criteria
A. Excessive anxiety and worry (apprehensive expectation), occurring more days
than not for at least 6 months, about a number of events or activities (such as
work or school performance).
B. The individual finds it difficult to control the worry.
C. The anxiety and worry are associated with three (or more) of the following six
symptoms (with at least some symptoms having been present for more days than
not for the past 6 months):
Note: 
Only one item is required in children.
1. Restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge.
2. Being easily fatigued.
3. Difficulty concentrating or mind going blank.
4. Irritability.
5. Muscle tension.
6. Sleep disturbance (difficulty falling or staying asleep, or restless,
unsatisfying sleep).
D. The anxiety, worry, or physical symptoms cause clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g.,
hyperthyroidism).
F. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., anxiety
or worry about having panic attacks in panic disorder, negative evaluation in
social anxiety disorder, contamination or other obsessions in obsessive-
compulsive disorder, separation from attachment figures in separation anxiety
disorder, reminders of traumatic events in posttraumatic stress disorder, gaining
weight in anorexia nervosa, physical complaints in somatic symptom disorder,
perceived appearance flaws in body dysmorphic disorder, having a serious illness
in illness anxiety disorder, or the content of delusional beliefs in schizophrenia
or delusional disorder).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of generalized anxiety disorder is excessive anxiety and worry
(apprehensive expectation) about a number of events or activities. The intensity, duration,
Psychiatry Online | DSM Library
2/10
or frequency of the anxiety and worry is out of proportion to the actual likelihood or
impact of the anticipated event. The individual finds it difficult to control the worry and to
keep worrisome thoughts from interfering with attention to tasks at hand. Adults
with generalized anxiety disorder often worry about everyday, routine life circumstances,
such as possible job responsibilities, health and finances, the health of family members,
misfortune to their children, or minor matters (e.g., doing household chores or being late
for appointments). Children with generalized anxiety disorder tend to worry excessively
about their competence or the quality of their performance. During the course of the
disorder, the focus of worry may shift from one concern to another.
Several features distinguish generalized anxiety disorder from nonpathological anxiety.
First, the worries associated with generalized anxiety disorder are excessive and typically
interfere significantly with psychosocial functioning, whereas the worries of everyday life
are not excessive and are perceived as more manageable and may be put off when more
pressing matters arise. Second, the worries associated with generalized anxiety
disorder are more pervasive, pronounced, and distressing; have longer duration; and
frequently occur without precipitants. The greater the range of life circumstances about
which a person worries (e.g., finances, children's safety, job performance), the more likely
his or her symptoms are to meet criteria for generalized anxiety disorder. Third, everyday
worries are much less likely to be accompanied by physical symptoms (e.g., restlessness or
feeling keyed up or on edge). Individuals with generalized anxiety disorder report
subjective distress as a result of constant worry and related impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
The anxiety and worry are accompanied by at least three of the following additional
symptoms: restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge, being easily fatigued, difficulty
concentrating or mind going blank, irritability, muscle tension, and disturbed sleep,
although only one additional symptom is required in children.
Associated Features
Associated with muscle tension, there may be trembling, twitching, feeling shaky, and
muscle aches or soreness. Many individuals with generalized anxiety disorder also
experience somatic symptoms (e.g., sweating, nausea, diarrhea) and an exaggerated startle
response. Symptoms of autonomic hyperarousal (e.g., accelerated heart rate, shortness of
breath, dizziness) are less prominent in generalized anxiety disorder than in other anxiety
disorders, such as panic disorder. Other conditions that may be associated with stress
(e.g., irritable bowel syndrome, headaches) frequently accompany generalized anxiety
disorder.
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of generalized anxiety disorder is 0.9% among adolescents and
2.9% among adults in the general community of the United States (
Kessler et al. 2012
).
The mean 12-month prevalence for the disorder around the world is 1.3%, with a range of
0.2% to 4.3% (
Lewis-Fernandez et al. 2010
; 
Mezuk et al. 2013
; 
Ruscio et al. 2017
). The
lifetime morbid risk in the United States is 9.0% (
Kessler et al. 2012
). Women and
adolescent girls are at least twice as likely as men and adolescent boys to experience
generalized anxiety disorder (
Kessler et al. 2012
; 
Ruscio et al. 2017
). The 12-month
prevalence in older adults including individuals age 75 years and older ranges from 2.8%
to 3.1% in the United States, Israel, and European countries (
Canuto et al.
2018
; 
Mackenzie et al. 2011
).
Psychiatry Online | DSM Library
3/10
Individuals of European descent tend to have symptoms that meet criteria for generalized
anxiety disorder more frequently than do individuals of Asian and African
descent (
Asnaani et al. 2010
; 
Lee et al. 2015
; 
Lewis-Fernandez et al. 2010
; 
Marques et al.
2011
; 
Mezuk et al. 2013
). Furthermore, individuals from high-income countries are more
likely than individuals from low- and middle-income countries to report that they have
experienced symptoms that meet criteria for generalized anxiety disorder in their
lifetime (
Lee et al. 2009
; 
Ruscio et al. 2017
).
Development and Course
Many individuals with generalized anxiety disorder report that they have felt anxious and
nervous all their lives. The mean age at onset for generalized anxiety disorder in North
America is 35 years, later than that for the other anxiety disorders (
de Lijster et al. 2017
);
the disorder rarely occurs prior to adolescence (
Beesdo et al. 2010
). However, age at onset
is spread over a very broad range (
de Lijster et al. 2017
; 
Kessler et al. 2012
) and tends to
be older in lower-income countries worldwide (
Ruscio et al. 2017
). The symptoms of
excessive worry and anxiety may occur early in life but are then manifested as an anxious
temperament (
Akiskal 1998
; 
Kagan and Snidman 1999
). Generalized anxiety disorder
symptoms tend to be chronic and wax and wane across the life span, fluctuating between
syndromal and subsyndromal forms of the disorder (
Angst et al. 2009
; 
Haller et al.
2014
; 
Newman et al. 2013
). Course is more persistent in lower-income countries, but
impairment tends to be higher in high-income countries (
Ruscio et al. 2017
). Rates of full
remission are very low (
Bruce et al. 2005
; 
Yonkers et al. 2003
).
The earlier in life individuals have symptoms that meet criteria for generalized anxiety
disorder, the more comorbidity and impairment they tend to have (
Campbell et al.
2003
; 
Le Roux et al. 2005
). Younger adults experience greater severity of symptoms than
do older adults (
Wolitzky-Taylor et al. 2010
).
The clinical expression of generalized anxiety disorder is relatively consistent across the
life span. The primary difference across age groups is in the content of the individual's
worry (
Andrews et al. 2010
; 
Kertz and Woodruff-Borden 2011
); thus, the content of an
individual's worry tends to be age appropriate.
In children and adolescents with generalized anxiety disorder, the anxieties and worries
often concern the quality of their performance or competence at school or in sporting
events, even when their performance is not being evaluated by others. There may be
excessive concerns about punctuality. They may also worry about catastrophic events,
such as earthquakes or nuclear war. Children with the disorder may be overly conforming,
perfectionistic, and unsure of themselves and may tend to redo tasks because of excessive
dissatisfaction with less-than-perfect performance. They may be overzealous in seeking
reassurance and approval and require excessive reassurance about their performance and
other things they are worried about.
In the elderly, the advent of chronic physical disease can be a potent issue for excessive
worry. In the frail elderly, worries about safety--and especially about falling--may limit
activities.
Risk and Prognostic Factors

Temperamental
Psychiatry Online | DSM Library
4/10
Behavioral inhibition, negative affectivity (neuroticism), harm avoidance, reward
dependence, and attentional bias to threat have been associated with generalized anxiety
disorder (
Beesdo et al. 2010
; 
Goodwin et al. 2017
; 
Moreno-Peral et al. 2014
).
Environmental
Childhood adversities and parenting practices (e.g., overprotection, overcontrol,
reinforcement of avoidance) have been associated with generalized anxiety
disorder (
Aktar et al. 2017
; 
Beesdo et al. 2010
; 
Green et al. 2010
; 
McLaughlin et al.
2010
; 
Moffitt et al. 2007
).
Genetic and physiological
One-third of the risk of experiencing generalized anxiety disorder is genetic, and these
genetic factors overlap with the risk of negative affectivity (neuroticism) and are shared
with other anxiety and mood disorders, particularly major depressive disorder (
Gottschalk
and Domschke 2017
).
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There is considerable cultural variation in the expression of generalized anxiety disorder.
For example, in some cultural contexts, somatic symptoms predominate in the expression
of the disorder, whereas in other cultural contexts cognitive symptoms tend to
predominate (
Ruscio et al. 2017
). This difference may be more evident on initial
presentation than subsequently, as more symptoms are reported over time. There is no
information as to whether the propensity for excessive worrying is related to cultural
background, although the topic being worried about can be culturally specific. It is
important to consider the social and cultural context when evaluating whether worries
about certain situations are excessive (
Lewis-Fernandez et al. 2010
; 
Marques et al. 2011
).
In the United States, higher prevalence is associated with exposure to racism and ethnic
discrimination and, for some ethnoracial groups, with being born in the United
States (
Budhwani et al. 2015
).
Sex- and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In clinical settings, generalized anxiety disorder is diagnosed somewhat more frequently
in women than in men (about 55%-60% of those presenting with the disorder are
women). In epidemiological studies, approximately two-thirds are women. Women and
men who experience generalized anxiety disorder appear to have similar symptoms but
demonstrate different patterns of comorbidity consistent with gender differences in the
prevalence of disorders. In women, comorbidity is largely confined to the anxiety
disorders and unipolar depression, whereas in men, comorbidity is more likely to extend
to the substance use disorders as well (
Donner and Lowry 2013
; 
Kramer et al.
2008
; 
Vesga-Lopez et al. 2008
).
Association With Suicidal Thoughts or Behavior
Generalized anxiety disorder is associated with increased suicidal thoughts and behavior,
even after adjustment for comorbid disorders and stressful life events (
Bentley et al.
2016
; 
Boden et al. 2017
; 
Nock et al. 2010
). Psychological autopsy studies show that
generalized anxiety disorder is the most frequent anxiety disorder diagnosed in
suicides (
De La Vega et al. 2018
). Both subthreshold and threshold generalized anxiety
disorder occurring in the past year may be associated with suicidal thoughts (
Gilmour
2016
).
Psychiatry Online | DSM Library
5/10
Functional Consequences of Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Excessive worrying impairs the individual's capacity to do things quickly and efficiently,
whether at home or at work. The worrying takes time and energy; the associated
symptoms of muscle tension and feeling keyed up or on edge, tiredness, difficulty
concentrating, and disturbed sleep contribute to the impairment. Importantly the
excessive worrying may impair the ability of individuals with generalized anxiety
disorder to encourage confidence in their children.
Generalized anxiety disorder is associated with significant disability and distress that is
independent of comorbid disorders, and most non-institutionalized adults with the
disorder are moderately to seriously disabled (
Newman et al. 2013
; 
Ruscio et al.
2017
). Generalized anxiety disorder accounts for 110 million disability days per annum in
the U.S. population (
Kessler et al. 2005
; 
Merikangas et al. 2007
). Generalized anxiety
disorder is also linked to decreased work performance, increased medical resource use,
and increased risk for coronary morbidity (
Celano et al. 2016
; 
Hoffman et al.
2008
; 
Newman et al. 2013
; 
Revicki et al. 2012
; 
Ruscio et al. 2017
).
Differential Diagnosis

Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition
The diagnosis of anxiety disorder due to another medical condition should be assigned if
the individual's anxiety and worry are judged, based on history, laboratory findings, or
physical examination, to be a physiological effect of another specific medical condition
(e.g., pheochromocytoma, hyperthyroidism).
Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder
A substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder is distinguished from generalized
anxiety disorder by the fact that a substance or medication (e.g., a drug of abuse, exposure
to a toxin) is judged to be etiologically related to the anxiety. For example, severe anxiety
that occurs only in the context of heavy coffee consumption would be diagnosed
as caffeine-induced anxiety disorder.
Social anxiety disorder
Individuals with social anxiety disorder often have anticipatory anxiety that is focused on
upcoming social situations in which they must perform or be evaluated by others, whereas
individuals with generalized anxiety disorder worry, whether or not they are being
evaluated.
Separation anxiety disorder
Individuals with separation anxiety disorder worry excessively only about separation from
attachment figures, whereas individuals with generalized anxiety disorder may worry
about separation but present other excessive worry concerns as well.
Panic disorder
Panic attacks that are triggered by worry in generalized anxiety disorder would not qualify
for panic disorder. However, if the individual experiences unexpected panic attacks as well
Psychiatry Online | DSM Library
6/10
and shows persistent concern and worry or behavioral change because of the attacks, then
an additional diagnosis of panic disorder should be considered.
Illness anxiety disorder and somatic symptom disorder
Individuals with generalized anxiety disorder worry about multiple events, situations, or
activities, only one of which may involve their health. If the individual's only fear is his or
her own illness, then illness anxiety disorder should be diagnosed. Worry focusing on
somatic symptoms is characteristic for somatic symptom disorder.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Several features distinguish the excessive worry of generalized anxiety disorder from the
obsessional thoughts of obsessive-compulsive disorder. In generalized anxiety disorder the
focus of the worry is about forthcoming problems, and it is the excessiveness of the worry
about future events that is abnormal. In obsessive-compulsive disorder, the obsessions are
inappropriate ideas that take the form of intrusive and unwanted thoughts, urges, or
images.
Posttraumatic stress disorder and adjustment disorders
Anxiety is invariably present in posttraumatic stress disorder. Generalized anxiety
disorder is not diagnosed if the anxiety and worry are better explained by symptoms
of posttraumatic stress disorder. Although anxiety may manifest in adjustment disorder,
this residual category should be used only when the criteria are not met for any other
mental disorder (including generalized anxiety disorder). Moreover, in adjustment
disorders, the anxiety occurs in response to an identifiable stressor within 3 months of the
onset of the stressor and does not persist for more than 6 months after the termination of
the stressor or its consequences.
Depressive, bipolar, and psychotic disorders
Although generalized anxiety/worry is a common associated feature of depressive, bipolar,
and psychotic disorders, generalized anxiety disorder may be diagnosed comorbidly if the
anxiety/worry is sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.
Comorbidity
Individuals whose presentation meets criteria for generalized anxiety disorder are likely to
have met, or currently meet, criteria for other anxiety and unipolar depressive
disorders (Brown et al. 2001; Grant et al. 2005; Ruscio et al. 2017). The negative
affectivity (neuroticism) or emotional liability that underpins this pattern of comorbidity
is associated with temperamental antecedents and genetic and environmental risk factors
shared between these disorders (Goldberg et al. 2009; Kessler et al. 2011), although
independent pathways are also possible (Beesdo et al. 2010; Mennin et al. 2008; Stein et
al. 2017). Comorbidity with substance use, conduct, psychotic, neurodevelopmental, and
neurocognitive disorders is less common.
