Habits

The Key to a Sustainable System of Deliberate 

Practice
Sam Malins, Scott D. Miller, Mark A. Hubble, and Daryl Chow
8
We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act, but a habit.
--WILL DURANT, 
THE STORY OF PHILOSOPHY
DECISION POINT
Begin here if you have read the book 
Better Results
 (
BR
) and
*  are routinely measuring your performance 
and
*  have collected sufficient data to establish a reliable, evidence-based profile 
of your therapeutic effectiveness 
and
*  have completed the Taxonomy of Deliberate Practice Activities in  
Psychotherapy 
and
*  have identified an individualized learning objective with the greatest chance 
of improving your effectiveness 
and
*  need help developing consistent deliberate practice routines.
T
he previous chapters have summarized key factors worthy of deliberate 
practice (DP) and offered concrete exercises to support the development 
of related skills. It is hoped the information presented thus far serves to support 
a decision to employ DP and provide clear direction on what to do. If this has 
happened, there is some important news: Deciding to engage in DP is half the 
182 
Malins et al.
battle in becoming more effective. Establishing a system to support implementation 
and make it a routine is the next step in ensuring DP has a lasting impact 
(Carden & Wood, 2018).
As has been said before, DP is a long game. Frequently, gains are not notice-
able in the short term (Ericsson, 2009; Ericsson et al., 1993). For this reason, 
reliance on intention, willpower, or motivation is risky and unlikely to be 
sufficient to sustain engagement following the burst of activity often associated 
with interest in a new endeavor (Ajzen et al., 2009). Incidentally, brain systems 
focused on thinking, decision making, and intentions operate differently from 
those fueling long-standing behavior patterns, which are much slower to 
change and require less conscious decision making (Wood & Runger, 2016). 
Said another way, force of will may be sufficient to scale a mountain today 
but not support a daily exercise regimen committed to yesterday. Doing the 
latter requires establishing a new 
habit
--defined as "a settled tendency or usual 
manner of behavior . . . that has become nearly or completely involuntary" 
(Merriam-Webster, n.d.). Thankfully, research provides a clear picture of the 
process involved.
This chapter will
* briefly summarize the empirical literature on long-term habit formation,
* identify evidence-based principles for making DP a default part of one's 
daily routine, and
* provide exercises to support the development of and overcome any barriers 
to a "DP habit."
FIELD GUIDE TIP
Set the 
Field Guide
 down and reread Chapter 14 
in 
Better Results
, "Designing a Sustainable System 
of Deliberate Practice."
Next, using a scale from 1 to 5 (where  
5 is 
high
 and 1 
low
), rate how well you have 
implemented each of the four elements of a 
successful deliberate practice plan. Known as 
ARPS, these include (a) automated structure,  
(b) reference point, (c) playful experimentations, 
and (d) support persons.
Reading further without first working at 
improving the implementation of any element 
scoring 3 or lower risks DP becoming just one 
more interesting but unused idea a therapist 
will come across in the course of their profes-
sional lifetime (Michie et al., 2009; Webb & 
Sheeran, 2006).
Habits 
183
REVIEW OF THE RESEARCH
A defining characteristic of a habit is that it occurs with little conscious effort 
or thought (Mazar & Wood, 2018; Verplanken, 2006; Wood & Neal, 2007). 
Central to its development is "automaticity," wherein environmental cues 
trigger the execution of a predictable pattern of behavior outside a person's 
intention or awareness (Bargh, 1994). This definition clarifies habit formation 
is more than repetition (although, as will be seen, doing something over and 
again plays a role) or merely the development of a sense of familiarity. Speaking 
metaphorically, an established habit is like part of the furniture. It exists and 
is employed effectively, with neither acknowledgment nor attention.
Wood (2019) identified three reliable pathways to habit formation and 
revision. The first is regular repetition. While it is widely believed habits take 
21 days to form, the evidence shows otherwise. It takes much longer. In what is 
now known as the seminal study on the subject, Lally et al. (2010) asked 96 
volunteers to work on developing a new, healthy habit (e.g., eating, drinking, or 
activity). Data on the frequency of completion and degree of automaticity indi-
cated an average of 
66
 days were required (with a range from 18 to 254), with 
more complex changes taking longer. Several other findings from the study 
are informative. First, missing the occasional opportunity to practice a new 
behavior resulted in only a negligible drop in the development of automaticity. 
Clearly, hope for success is not dashed when choice or circumstance results 
in a "time-out." Second, context is important (Lally et al., 2011). Practicing in 
the same location on the same day at the same time is facilitative. Environ-
ments with unique or memorable features are also helpful, providing cues for 
action (e.g., "I do 20 minutes DP every Friday in my office following the team 
meeting, and that's also when I have a caramel latte each week"). Third, and 
finally, the wide range in times reported by Lally and colleagues indicates 
some habits can form much more quickly. Identifying these and breaking 
down more complex ones into their smaller constituent parts makes shorter, 
easier-to-schedule practice periods possible, thereby increasing opportunities 
for automation to develop more quickly (Kaushal & Rhodes, 2015). While on 
the subject of time, Fogg (2020), following years of research at the Behavior 
Design Lab at Stanford, concluded consistency is far more important than 
amount. Doing a few minutes of a given activity on a regular basis, he reported, 
yields more dividends than regularly increasing the time allotted to practice. 
The reason is simple. It is easier to commit to and follow through with small 
"entry points," recognizing they can always be extended. By contrast, setting 
up longer periods and then failing to fill the time with practice can sponsor 
frustration and disappointment.
The second pathway is rewards. Forming new habits requires persistence 
despite the pressure of distractions or more desirable pursuits (Andersson & 
Bergman, 2011). Along the way, rewards can help maintain focus and con-
centration, with particular types superior to others. Intrinsic rewards (e.g., 
reminders of internal motivations) tend to be more effective than extrinsic 
(e.g., money, validation by managers or a supervisor; Lally & Gardner, 2013). 
184 
Malins et al.
External rewards 
can
 enhance habit formation, provided they do not become 
the sole purpose of practicing (Deci et al., 1999). For example, a meta-analysis 
of 40 years of research conducted by Cerasoli et al. (2014) found extrinsic 
rewards negatively alter the link between internal motivation and perfor-
mance outcomes. In particular, when the locus of control shifts to someone 
or something outside the self, what one once did because it felt right or good 
becomes a chore.
The last pathway is reducing friction. Consider the following: slightly 
delaying the time an elevator takes to arrive once the call button is pressed, 
increasing the distance one must cross to access unhealthy food, and placing 
recycling bins close to workers. All share a common characteristic. They either 
increase or decrease the likelihood of a desirable behavior occurring and being 
repeated: increasing the use of stairs, decreasing the consumption of "junk" 
food, and separating reusables from trash, respectively (Clohessy et al., 2019; 
Houten et al., 1981; Ludwig et al., 1998; Rozin et al., 2011; Soler et al., 2010; 
Wansink et al., 2016). In the literature, such elements or conditions have come 
to be called "friction" (Wood & Neal, 2016). Common to all work environments 
and pursuits, they can be modified in the service of promoting habit formation. 
Reduce the source to increase behavioral options and repetition; increase them, 
and the opposite occurs.
In their study of highly effective therapists, Miller and Hubble (2011) found 
those who eventually rise to the top, becoming "supershrinks," do not "exist 
in a vacuum, bursting suddenly on the scene following years of private toil" 
(p. 25). Far from it. The best reside in a social context consisting of people--
family, partners, colleagues, supervisors, teachers, coaches--who nurture and 
support habits of excellence. It is familiar to anyone committed to DP: What 
is required is continuously reaching for performance objectives beyond one's 
current ability, adopting an error-centric mindset (i.e., welcoming mistakes as 
learning opportunities), and being open to feedback.
Greaney et al. (2018) reported on the role of social support in changing 
risky habits (e.g., smoking, unhealthy eating, sedentary lifestyle). Participants 
who identified one supportive person were significantly more successful than 
those who tried to go it alone. "Participants identifying multiple support 
persons," the authors found, "had 100% greater reduction" in multiple risky 
behaviors (p. 198). Thus, when it comes to developing new habits, social support 
is good, and more is better.
EVIDENCE-BASED PRINCIPLES RELATED TO HABIT FORMATION
No doubt, DP has the potential to help you achieve better results. The same 
is seen in many domains of human performance. The challenge, once you 
begin to implement it, is sustainability. Detailed suggestions were provided in 
Chapter 14 of 
Better Results
 (
BR
; pp. 157-170). If you haven't already done so 
and find yourself struggling to be consistent, we recommend returning to that 
Habits 
185
section first, paying particular attention to the discussion of ARPS (automated 
structure, reference point, playful experimentations, and support persons). 
For ease of reference, Table 14.2 from 
BR
 summarizing the four elements and 
potential action steps is represented here. 
System
Think . . .
Description
Automated structure
Algorithmically
Schedule it
Protect the DP environment
Create a black box
Reference point
Directionally
Keep one eye on your outcome data
Keep the other eye on your current learning 
objectives (see TDPA)
Playful experimentation
Like a child
Lateral learning
Call on your ideal identity
The "it's never too late to have a good 
session" technique
Arrange a surprise party
Test to learn, don't learn for the test
Support
Communally
Form a scenius community
Seek out separate coaches for performance 
and development
The ARPS framework is supported by the research on habit formation 
reviewed in this chapter. By definition, habits do not require planning or 
forethought. Transforming new behaviors into habits does, however. You 
must establish systems (e.g., turning off the phone, email notifications) and 
structures (e.g., time, place, focus) that make engagement in DP 
automatic
, 
independent of one's motivational state. Rewards are also important. Here 
is where having a 
reference point
 is essential. What better reward for DP exists 
than comparing your current performance data with your baseline and seeing 
progress, the results of your hard work? In addition, maintaining a 
playful
attitude and spirit of 
experimentation
--especially in the face of the setbacks and 
mistakes that are an integral part of DP--supports the risk-taking necessary for 
the development of new ways of thinking and behaving (Brown & Vaughan, 
2009). Last but not least is social support; its importance cannot be overstated. 
Friends, colleagues, coaches, and a community greatly increase the chances 
of successful habit formation.
In addition to ARPS, three principles emerge from the review of the empir-
ical literature.
Principle 1: Identity Matters
The role therapist identity can play in developing and sustaining DP habits 
was introduced, along with concrete exercises, in 
BR
 (Miller et al., 2020, 
186 
Malins et al.
pp. 123-137, 165). Simply put, our professional identity reflects the values 
we hold about the world and our work. When consciously and intentionally 
aligned with our DP objectives, the time and effort we devote to improving 
our ability to help become intrinsically rewarding, adding meaning and 
purpose to our engagement in challenging, long-term projects. Such align-
ment, research further shows, enhances our sense of personal authenticity 
(Gan & Chen, 2017).
Principle 2: Anticipation Is the Best Defense
Having a clear DP plan helps in habit formation. That said, many are too 
idealistic in scope, failing to consider the barriers likely encountered along 
the way (Buehler et al., 2010). When it comes to goal setting, current evi-
dence suggests the combination of two strategies works best: first, visualizing 
the desired objective (e.g., reviewing outcome data twice a week, spending 
20 minutes twice a week at the end of the workday completing one of the 
many exercises recommended in the 
Field Guide
) and, second, connecting it 
with the key barriers to achievement and concrete plans for addressing such 
obstacles. Making it easy to anticipate and adapt to problems encountered 
(i.e., if situation X arises, I will use strategy Y to achieve goal Z) lessens  
the chance of disrupting automaticity, characteristic of established habits 
(Gollwitzer, 1999).
Principle 3: You Have Done This Before
More than 40% of what we do on a daily basis is habitual--patterns of thinking 
and behaving you have already successfully created (Wood, 2019). Whether 
deemed "good" or "bad," "healthy," or "unhealthy," the same process is 
involved. In short, you have done this before. Habits may be hard work to 
establish or change, but doing so is nothing new. Using what you have learned 
from these experiences will be helpful in developing the habits necessary to 
sustain your engagement in DP.
EXERCISES FOR DEVELOPING THE HABITS SUPPORTING 

DELIBERATE PRACTICE
The following exercises are aligned with the principles and aim to help make 
DP a permanent 
and
 evolving part of your professional development. Each 
is to be completed within a specified time--most within 5 minutes. For this 
reason, it will be helpful to have a timer present. No need for a fancy stop-
watch because most mobile phones come with one. Each can be completed 
alone or together with a colleague or coach. Table 8.1 provides an at-a-glance 
summary of the principles and their associated exercises. The first four revisit 
the ARPS framework.
Habits 
187
TABLE 8.1.
 Summary of Principles and Exercises
Principle
Principle summary
Related exercises
Exercise summary
1: Automated structure
Build DP into your existing 
automated habits.
1: Make it so 
2: Make it easy and rewarding
Schedule DP and specify the particular activities for  
each episode to make them more likely to happen.
Incorporate small, but meaningful rewards into DP,  
ideally linked to its overall purpose.
2: Reference point
Finding a range of ways to track 
progress toward goals helps 
when improvement is slow.
3: Where are you now?
Build qualitative and quantitative performance benchmarks 
into DP alongside regular reviews.
3: Playful experimentation
Approach DP with playfulness to 
maintain creativity and manage 
difficulties.
4: Playful progress
5: All change
6: Parallel play
Use comic rewards, light-hearted exercises with friends 
and family, music or rhyming in DP.
Capitalize on current or upcoming changes that disrupt 
existing habits and may make room for new ones.
Try out DP in areas of your life other than psychotherapy, 
particularly active rest hobbies.
4: Support
Do not approach DP alone;  
invite and recruit others to 
support DP.
7: Choosing a coach
8: Building a support network
Identify one or two potential coaches and contact them 
for an initial conversation.
Reach out to a peer or network of peers who are either 
using DP or you think could benefit from trying it.
5: Identify your identity
Build rewards into DP that remind 
you of who you are becoming 
as you practice.
9: The retirement party
Write a speech that includes what you would like to be 
said about you and your future work at retirement.
6: Forewarned is forearmed
When planning goals, make sure 
they account for the most 
important barriers to progress.
10: The premortem
Plan for potential problems with implementing DP by 
imagining you have already failed and why it happened.
7: You have done this before
Use strategies and knowledge 
you have gained from building 
habits previously.
11: This is not your first rodeo
Go through your habit history, identifying factors that 
helped and hindered you in building habits.
Note.
 DP = deliberate practice.
188 
Malins et al.
Exercise 1: Make It So (5 minutes)
Principle: The 
A

 in ARPS

Purpose
Busyness is a common barrier to making DP routine. Scheduling ahead of 
time is the "antidote." Start small--10 to 20 minutes. Eliminate as much 
prep work as possible by identifying specific tasks you can begin at the outset 
of your scheduled time. Small, meaningful, and clearly defined tasks will help 
you to get going and make the time feel like it was well spent, especially at 
the start.
Task
Make short periods of DP a part of your schedule for the coming month.  
To ensure success,
* make it obvious in your calendar so it cannot be overwritten and is visible 
to you and anyone who handles your schedule;
* connect your DP to an established habit in your work routine (e.g., after 
lunch or a regular meeting that is unlikely to be canceled);
* reward yourself after completing a DP activity;
* include time to rest in the scheduling--DP is effortful, so shorter, intensive 
periods of DP followed by brief rests is more effective; and
* share what you are doing with others, friends, family, and particularly 
colleagues who are incorporating DP in their work.
Exercise 2: Make It Easy and Rewarding (5-15 minutes)
Principle: 1
Purpose
It is learning theory 101. What you reward increases. Punishment suppresses 
behavior. Identifying small, meaningful rewards will support your motivation 
to continue DP, especially at the outset when the most effort is required.
Task
Mindful of the research reviewed earlier documenting the potency of intrinsic 
rewards and the reduction of friction in habit formation, devote time to 
creating a work environment that makes DP easy, enjoyable, and productive 
(people, decor, artwork, furniture, natural light, everyday conveniences, and 
tangible rewards).
* Make a list of your reasons for doing DP. In constructing or organizing your 
workspace, find ways to remind yourself of your best intentions. It could be 
a picture, an objet d'art, a poster with an inspirational quote, or an avatar 
on your social media profile. It could even be a reminder on your phone or 
computer.
Habits 
189
* Spend a few minutes each week for 1 month noting what gets in the way 
of your DP. It could be clutter, excessive noise, hunger, size of caseload, or 
anything. The following month, rank order the barriers from most to least 
disruptive and start addressing them one at a time, starting at the top.
* Make a list of people with whom you will share your successes and strug-
gles, seeking out cheerleaders rather than naysayers, team players rather 
than competitors.
Exercise 3: Where Are You Now? (5-15 minutes)
Principle: 2
Purpose
In a long-term learning project such as DP, having a regular, understandable 
assessment of key performance indicators helps identify progress where it 
might not be noticed otherwise.
Task
Identify and/or build in key performance reference points of where you  
are now:
* Find out or calculate your current outcome performance metrics, ideally 
benchmarked against the performance of other psychotherapists, as dis-
cussed in Chapter 1.
* Identify your current individualized learning objective, preferably using 
recordings of your sessions to help you discover it, coupled with your 
aggregated outcomes.
* Keep a recording of a recent session that highlighted some current skill 
deficits you will work on with DP, where you have permission to retain 
the recording for a few months. Diarize a time to listen back to this session 
segment after a couple of months of DP.
* Use your current "how I do therapy" blueprint (see Chapter 1 for further 
explanation) as a qualitative benchmark, redrafting and reviewing it as 
your practice evolves with DP.
At least once a month, review these way markers as part of your DP to help 
identify points of change.
Exercise 4: Playful Progress (5-15 minutes)
Principle: 3
Purpose
DP can be hard, and the slow progress can be disheartening. Therefore, this 
exercise aims to help find ways of bringing playfulness to the process, which 
can maintain a sense of fun, creativity, and lightheartedness.
190 
Malins et al.
Task
Brainstorm ways to bring playfulness into DP, then try one or two out at 
your next DP sessions. Some examples of bringing playfulness to DP are
* setting your individualized learning goals to music, such as a jingle on a 
commercial (alternatively, work out a rhyme that describes your learning 
objective);
* trying out the therapeutic skills you are developing in DP with friends and 
family members during casual conversations and seeking their feedback 
in a lighthearted way; and
* making comic rewards for attempts at improvement (e.g., winning a jelly 
bean or chocolate, gaining a plastic trophy for a set number of DP hours).
Exercise 5: All Change (5-15 minutes)
Principle: 3
Purpose
This exercise aims to help you identify areas of upcoming or existing change that 
may present a way to playfully introduce new habits that could support DP.
Task
Take 2 to 5 minutes to list changes that are going on in your home or work 
life at the moment or that have occurred recently. Your list can include any-
thing, but the following are some examples to prompt your thinking to 
include changes you may have badged as positive or negative:
* changing jobs (Yes. Drastic. But some jobs are hazardous to your well-being 
and are not conducive to your development.)
* moving desks
* working in a new way or system
* having a new supervisor or coach
* getting a new pet, child, or partner
Consider the following:
* How could these changes disrupt the status quo in a way that paves a route 
to new DP-related habits? Take 2 to 5 minutes to brainstorm ways that 
changes in your life might facilitate the introduction of DP.
* Take 1 to 5 minutes to consider where you might start with leveraging this 
change to support DP.
Exercise 6: Parallel Play (5-10 minutes to start)
Principle: 3
Purpose
Many high achievers in demanding roles find 
active rest
, hobbies that, in some 
ways, reflect themes of their work but without key drawbacks. A quintessential 
Habits 
191
example of this is academics who are rock climbers: Climbing takes thought, 
planning, and a strategy and is time consuming--just like research. However, 
with rock climbing, you get the exhilaration of success by the end of the 
day rather than having to wait months or years for the outcome of research 
(Mitchell, 1983). This exercise aims to identify activities that are outside the 
realm of psychotherapy DP but might draw on parallel principles.
Task
Are there any activities you do or used to do that can give a similar sense of 
achievement or satisfaction as psychotherapy but in a different sphere of life? 
For example, playing basketball may, at face value, look completely unrelated 
to psychotherapy, but perhaps there are parallels in the way that you aim to 
collaborate with players on your team or the way you strategically analyze how 
to address particularly challenging defenses in a time-out. However, basketball 
also avoids some of the difficulties of psychotherapy--you get to know how 
it pans out by the end of the evening rather than working for several weeks, 
months, or years to see the fruit of your labor.
* Identify an activity or hobby that is like psychotherapy but not psycho-
therapy, and consider trying DP in this area at the same time as DP in psycho-
therapy. Continuing our basketball example, rather than just shooting around 
at random when you are starting to play, work out a short practice that is 
likely to help you shoot more effectively, even though it may take small 
incremental gains. A similar approach could be taken to swimming, running, 
chess, crochet, or any hobby requiring specific trainable skills. Think of a 
way of doing DP that isn't psychotherapy DP and can be playful or fun.
* If you once found an activity that gave similar satisfaction to psychotherapy, 
but you no longer do it, now might be a good time to restart this pursuit 
to provide a release from the efforts of DP for psychotherapy in a different 
area that could provide a similar sense of reward.
Exercise 7: Choosing a Coach (5-10 minutes)
Principle: 4
Purpose
Given the central role of a coach in DP, this exercise aims to help identify 
someone with the appropriate characteristics.
Task
Identify one or two potential coaches and contact them one at a time for an 
initial conversation. Aim high with this choice (see 
BR
; Miller et al., 2020, 
pp. 35-39, 112-113). Aim for someone who you feel
* has authority but is not authoritarian,
* is invested in you finding your best way of doing things rather than repli-
cating their approach,
192 
Malins et al.
* is clear about where you want help, and
* has sufficient skill to be able to identify your deficits and offer strategies to 
remediate them.
Exercise 8: Building a Support Network (5-10 minutes)
Principle: 4
Purpose
Given the central role of a coach in DP, this exercise aims to help identify 
someone with the appropriate characteristics.
Task
Reach out to a peer or network of peers who are embarking on the use of DP 
in their practice or people you would like to encourage to do so. You could 
collaborate with someone who works in your area or reach out beyond. 
The International Center for Clinical Excellence network might be a useful 
starting place (see https://www.iccexcellence.com).
Exercise 9: The Retirement Party (30 minutes)
Principle: 5
Purpose
This is an adaptation of an existing exercise (Harris, 2009) that aims to link 
personal values with DP and the longer term results of persisting with it.
Task
Imagine you set up a sustainable system of DP from this day forth. It is now 
your retirement party, and a close friend who knows you well and cares about 
you gets up in front of your family, friends, and colleagues to give a speech 
about how you conducted the remainder of your career. What would you want 
them to be able to say about you and what was important to you during the 
rest of your career?
* Take a couple of minutes to picture the scene and imagine what principles 
or values you would like to hear your friend say that you upheld and stood 
for through the rest of your career. Write these down (5 minutes).
* Now your friend describes some of the things you did on a regular basis that 
showed what you valued. What routine practices would you like them to 
be able to cite? Some might be activities you already do, but some may be 
activities you aspire to do. List these regular, routine activities (3 minutes).
* Where would DP fit in this speech? What would your friend say about
 - what you did,
 - how you made DP part of your day-to-day life,
 - how you overcame barriers to keep it going throughout your career, and
 - how DP impacted your personal and professional life and those you 
encountered?
Habits 
193
* Spend 3 minutes on each of these areas, writing down what you would 
like your friend to be able to say at your retirement party.
* Look back over what you have written either alone, with a colleague who 
has completed the same exercise or with a coach or supervisor. Spend 
10 minutes reviewing these questions in reflection on this exercise:
 - What are the central threads running throughout the speech that are 
components of your identity you would like to nurture and grow?
 - How might DP support this?
 - What does this exercise tell you about how DP might need to look for it 
to play a consistent role in your career?
 - What does this speech tell you about where to start with implementing 
DP now?
Exercise 9: The 5-Minute Version
Imagine a close friend giving a speech about the rest of your career at your 
retirement party. Spend a minute each on (a) thinking about where DP would 
fit in this speech, (b) how DP would support the important values you would 
like to uphold in the rest of your career, and (c) how DP would look and fit in 
your ideal future career. Now spend 2 minutes reflecting on what this tells 
you about how you want DP to affect your identity and where it would be 
best to start with this system.
Exercise 10: The Premortem (30 minutes)
Principle: 6
Purpose
Prospective hindsight is a process of imagining a future event has already 
happened and helps people to be more accurate in predicting how plans 
will progress (Mitchell et al., 1989). Gary Klein (2007) applied this approach 
to project planning by asking participants to imagine a project has already 
failed. This approach helped participants identify weaknesses in the plan and 
adjustments required to improve it. The premortem approach is applied to DP 
implementation in this exercise.
Task
Imagine you started a system of DP today, and you are looking back a year 
from now. It has been a complete disaster and has failed miserably.
* Write a detailed description of why it failed so badly and all the reasons 
that caused the failure. Remember to write in the past tense, looking back 
a year from now. This helps overcome futuristic optimism and the planning 
fallacy and gives clarity on potential barriers that may be difficult to call to 
mind when hopeful about a future plan (10 minutes).
* Create an "if-then" guide for each potential problem your DP system may 
face. Discuss this with a colleague or a coach or supervisor to help brainstorm 
194 
Malins et al.
adaptations to your plans that would account for the barriers you are likely 
to face (15 minutes).
* In case these were not identified in your premortem, some of the most 
likely barriers are described next. Spend 5 minutes checking whether the 
plans you have made will address these issues:
 -
 The pull to perform:
 It is unlikely anyone in your service will be 
pushing you to make DP happen, but there may well be a pull to get 
more clients seen more quickly, which could cut into DP time. How 
would you deal with that?
 -
 A hard day's night:
 As described earlier, DP is effortful and tiring, so it 
may not be the most appetizing activity to follow a hard day, week, or 
therapy session. The mental effort involved in DP could spoil your plans 
when internal resources are depleted. How could you overcome that?
 -
 Resource restriction:
 Professional development activities are limited 
in almost all psychotherapy organizations and are usually focused on 
attaining competence (or at least familiarity) with new therapeutic 
techniques. This is unlikely to leave much room for DP, which aims to 
be an ongoing component of professional development for all therapy 
techniques. How would you tackle this conundrum?
 -
 Softening the blow (maybe too much):
 Some supervisors or coaches 
might feel DP is a way of being excessively self-critical. They may empha-
size the complexity of a client's problems, say that your efforts are good 
enough, or perhaps infer that you are nit-picking by identifying a small 
unhelpful habit in the grand scheme of things. In general, your support 
systems may aim to comfort you in a well-meaning manner when you 
identify microskills for DP. There may be truth in what they say, but how 
will you manage this dynamic to progress with DP?
Exercise 10: The 5-Minute Version
Spend 2 minutes imagining that your attempt to embed DP fails terribly 
over the coming months. Spend 1 minute identifying the top three reasons 
why this happened. Pick the most important of these three reasons and take 
2 minutes to make at least one "if-then" plan for how you would tackle it.
Exercise 11a: This Is Not Your First Rodeo, Part 1--Your Forgotten 
Rodeos (15-20 minutes for each part, ideally alone initially, then reflect 
with a coach, practice partner, or small group)
Principle: 7
Purpose
This series of exercises aims to draw on your previous experience of building 
sustainable habits (or attempts to do so) and how this can inform your plan 
for a sustainable DP system.
Habits 
195
Task
Think through times in your personal or professional life when you have felt 
excited, enthused, determined, or energized to try something new or different, 
and it has not worked out. Perhaps you started but could not stick with it, or 
nothing happened at all. With the benefit of hindsight, what got in the way 
in each of these areas?
* 
Existing routine:
 Specifically, what daily structures or habits prevented 
this from becoming part of your normal life?
* 
Environment:
 What environmental cues (or the absence of such cues) 
might have made it harder for this habit to form?
* 
People:
 Which people did you not have on board who might have helped 
with this (or potentially obstructed habit formation because they were not 
involved)?
* 
Willpower:
 How much importance did you place on willpower in making 
this habit work?
Exercise 11b: This Is Not Your First Rodeo, Part 2--Your Winning 
Rodeos (15-20 minutes)
Principle: 7
Purpose
This part of the exercise aims to make use of helpful strategies established in 
previous or existing habits that may be applied to DP.
Task
Think about helpful, healthy, and/or valued activities you do regularly as part 
of your current routine at work or in your personal life.
* Specifically identify two to five habits or routines that are important to 
you that support aspects of your work or your life more broadly. These 
are likely to be habits you take completely for granted and may be so deep 
in the water that you could easily overlook them. If it is hard to think of 
these, go through a typical day from waking up, and in 30-minute inter-
vals, identify activities that are helpful for you.
* What helped these habits to form? Again, be aware of the urge just to 
shrug your shoulders and say, "Well, they just seemed to happen." If this 
is your experience, it is just underlining that massive, long-standing bouts 
of willpower are not the key to long-standing habit formation. This is the 
beauty of habits: Their ability to continue is barely noticeable in terms of 
conscious effort, but this makes it difficult to identify their mechanisms. 
One way to do this is to track back to a time when you were not doing the 
habit and consider how it started.
196 
Malins et al.
* Think through the role played by each of the following areas in forming 
each habit.
 -
 Existing routine:
 What aspects of your existing routine (at the time 
the habit was started) helped the new habit to form? In what way did 
existing behaviors cue the new habit? What factors were reinforcing, 
rewarding, reminding, or recognizing occasions of carrying out the habit?
 -
 Environment:
 What was going on in your environment that cued the 
new habit--even if in small, seemingly trivial ways, such as objects being 
close and accessible or far away and inaccessible?
 -
 People:
 Who was involved in either helping form this habit (maybe 
you did it with someone or for someone) or supported you in forming 
this habit? What did they do? How did you get them involved?
 -
 Willpower:
 In the long term, what role did willpower play in estab-
lishing this habit?
Exercise 11c: This Is Not Your First Rodeo, Part 3--Your Next Rodeo 
(15-20 minutes)
Principle: 7
Purpose
The final part of this exercise uses what was learned in Parts 1 and 2 to distill 
strategies likely to be helpful in DP, alongside possible barriers and how to 
manage them.
Task
Reflect on the key themes you noticed while completing Parts 1 and 2 with a 
coach, practice partner, or small group who have also completed the exercise.
* Use your reflections from Parts 1 and 2 to complete Table 8.2.
* Identify what has been helpful and unhelpful from your previous experi-
ences of successful and unsuccessful attempts to integrate new habits into 
your routine.
TABLE 8.2.
 Applying Learning From Previous Habits to a Sustainable System of DP
Areas for rewards, reinforcers, 
reminders, and recognition
Unhelpful with 
habits before
Helpful with  
habits before
Helpful for DP  
habits now
Integrating into routine 
Environmental cues 
Involvement of people 
Where willpower fits 
Habits 
197
* From these elements, what do you think might help you establish a 
sustainable system of DP? Pay particular attention to rewards, reinforcers, 
reminders, and recognition in the way you could
 - integrate DP into your existing routine,
 - shape your environment to encourage DP,
 - helpfully involve other people in your DP habits, and
 - keep willpower in its rightful place.
Exercise 11: The 5-Minute Version
Spend 2 minutes identifying healthy, helpful, and/or valued activities you carry 
out on a regular basis. Now spend 2 minutes identifying habits you wanted to 
form but failed to do so. Take a minute to reflect on the differences between the 
two and how this informs your approach to embedding DP sustainably.
SUMMARY
No matter how motivated you feel about DP right now or how strong you 
perceive your willpower to be, the main message of this chapter is that the 
structured systems you build around DP hold more sway in keeping you going 
in the longer term. Specifically, this chapter outlined current evidence on using 
rewards linked to intrinsic motivators, managing the environment to promote 
and protect DP, finding appropriate support, and tracking progress. Perhaps most 
important, this chapter discussed the likelihood of failure and how responses 
to obstacles can be key in the continuation of a challenging but important 
activity like DP. Like some sustainable practices in energy use, the activities 
recommended in this chapter could seem to slow immediate progress and feel 
costly, but in the long run, aim to generate their own energy, requiring less 
motivation-related resources over time for sustaining DP.
