The Holistic Model of Stress
Savoring Eustress While Coping With Distress

Most employees have a love-hate relationship with work: A job often con-
sists of a mixed bag of things we find both exciting and exhausting. For 
example, the COVID-19 pandemic necessitated a switch to working remotely 
for many employees around the globe, which often meant working from 
home. As a result of this sudden transition, people experienced the uncer-
tainty of learning new ways of communicating with team members and clients, 
the fatigue of spending countless hours in online meetings, the anxiety of 
being away from coworkers, and the frustration of not knowing when, or if, 
there would ever be a return to the office. Simultaneously, this experience 
brought the satisfaction of learning new skills, the freedom of spending more 
time with friends and family, the meaningfulness of helping team members  
or clients with challenges they were experiencing, and the hope of knowing 
things would change again, even if they might never return to "normal." This 
mix of positive and negative attitudes and emotions resulted from individual 
interpretations of a single event. We found strategies to cope with the bad, 
and we explored ways to enjoy and extend the good. Ultimately, many employees 
experienced changes in their own work performance behaviors, and maybe 
even their mental and physical health.
Although quite a lot is known about distress, or the negative response to 
stressors, as well as dysfunctional outcomes that typically follow from distress, 
the positive outcomes that arise from stress at work merit increased attention. 
The extension of the positive psychology movement into the realm of 
occupational health psychology allows us to study the positive side of the 
stress experience: eustress. We assert that the proper way to advance  
the study of eustress is to add the positive aspect of the stress experience to 
the well-developed psychology of disease and dysfunction. Thus, we propose 
a holistic theoretical model that integrates our vast knowledge of negative 
causes, consequences, and outcomes with current developments in stress 
research and positive psychology. As shown in Figure 4.1, this conceptual 
framework captures both positive (eustress) and negative (distress) psycho-
logical responses to job demands. As an extension of Simmons and colleagues' 
work on eustress (Nelson & Simmons, 2003; Simmons, 2000), the current 
holistic model of stress draws upon the principles of the job demands-resource 
(JD-R) theory (Demerouti et al., 2001) and emphasizes the role of person-
environment (P-E) fit in distress and eustress responses (Edwards et al., 1998; 
Kristof, 1996).
The demands, distress response, coping, and outcomes portion of the model 
are well known in the occupational stress literature, so they are discussed only 
briefly. The unique aspects of this model--the demands, eustress, savoring, and 
outcomes pathway--are the main focus of discussion. In particular, we explore 
in detail the indicators of eustress and savoring of eustress. We close by consid-
ering some of the methodological challenges in the study of eustress.
THE CONCEPT OF EUSTRESS
We believe that eustress can best be conceptualized as capturing the positive 
aspects of the stress response itself. Building on Simmons and Nelson's (2007) 
eustress model, our central tenets are as follows:
* Demands/stressors are inherently neutral.
* Demands are cognitively appraised to the degree to which they are both 
challenging and hindering.
* This cognitive appraisal produces a simultaneous positive and negative 
response. It is this response that has positive and/or negative valence based 
on the degree of attraction and/or aversion the individual experiences toward  
the event or object.
* Job resources, personal resources, and the match between a person and their 
work environment each affect the ways in which demands are appraised; 
therefore, they moderate the relationship between demands and appraisals.
* Positive and negative responses are complex and mixed; therefore, they 
manifest themselves in a variety of distinct physiological, psychological, 
and behavioral indicators. Degrees of both positive and negative indica-
tors of responses will be present for any given demand. (Note: Our model 
does not focus on physiological indicators because they are less observable 
by managers interacting with employees, and therefore are less subject to 
The Holistic Model of Stress
 67
Stressor/job demands
* Role demands
* Interpersonal demands
* Physical demands
* Workplace polices
Demands/stressor
Cognitive appraisal
Job resources &
personal resources
*
Person-environment fit
Eustress
* Engagement
* Satisfaction
* Commitment
* Hope
Distress
* Burnout
* Anxiety
* Frustration
* Job alienation 
Response strategies
Savoring 
* Job crafting
* Positive emotion regulation
Coping
* Preventive stress management
* Emotion-focused
Psychological response 
state
Job performance
* Organizational 
citizenship 
behavior (OCB)/ 
counterproductive 
work behavior (CWB)
Outcomes
Challenge & 
hindrance 
appraisal
* Well-being
* Flourishing 
* Withdrawal 
FIGURE 4.1.
 Holistic Model of Work Stress
68 
Simmons, Hanna, and Hu
managerial intervention. Nonetheless, we acknowledge that these physio-
logical indicators do exist and are experienced by employees.)
* Individuals select strategies to either eliminate or alleviate negative responses 
to demands (i.e., coping) and/or to accentuate or extend positive responses 
(i.e., savoring). These strategies can be focused either on the perceived demand 
or on the stress response.
* Positive and negative responses differentially affect valued outcomes at work.
Stressors
The physical or psychological stimuli to which an individual responds are 
commonly referred to as 
stressors
 or 
demands
. Stressors at work take the form 
of role demands, interpersonal demands, physical demands, workplace poli-
cies, and job conditions (Quick et al., 1997). Some of these demands will be 
less salient for certain individuals while producing significant responses in 
others. Because knowledge of demands has typically been embedded in the 
pathological perspective of stress and health, some work refers to these demands 
as 
distressors
. Other stress researchers have distinguished between 
challenge 
stressors
 and 
hindrance stressors
, which place positive or negative valence on 
both the demand and the response (Podsakoff et al., 2007). In this frame-
work, hindrance stressors produce strain, as indicated by burnout, anxiety, 
frustration, and exhaustion; but challenge stressors facilitate positive job atti-
tudes like satisfaction and commitment. However, our model presents a 
departure from these perspectives. We suggest that to be consistent with the 
cognitive appraisal of 
neutral
 stressors, which provides the theoretical founda-
tion of our model, the assignment of valence should be reserved for the indi-
vidual stress 
response
 rather than the stressor.
Our holistic approach to stress is squarely rooted in the transactional model 
articulated by Lazarus and Folkman (1984) and further built upon by the more 
recent JD-R theory (Demerouti et al., 2001). The transactional model of stress 
suggests that stress can be conceived of as an imbalance between demands 
and resources. Similarly, the JD-R theory proposes that different demands 
interact with resources to produce an individual's level of well-being at work. 
Following from these theories, we expect that most work situations simulta-
neously elicit a mix of positive and negative responses in individuals as a 
result of the individual's cognitive appraisal of a particular demand given their 
particular set of resources.
For example, a recently promoted individual should be expected to expe-
rience joy and satisfaction associated with the recognition of achievement, as 
well as excitement about the opportunity to pursue new goals and challenges 
at work. At the same time, and as a result of the same situation, the individual 
may also experience anxiety about moving to a new department away from 
their usual coworkers or having to tell friends, family, and colleagues that the 
new promotion involves relocation to another city. On the other hand, an 
individual recently downsized out of a job can be expected to experience loss 
The Holistic Model of Stress
 69
and anxiety about having to find a new position. Yet at the same time, they may 
feel relieved to be leaving a stressful job on a sinking ship or may see the job loss 
as an opportunity to spend more coveted time with family.
Indeed, empirical work supports the notion that stressors simultaneously 
elicit positive and negative stress responses. For instance, one of the most 
significant sources of stress for hospital nurses is the death of a patient (Gray-
Toft & Anderson, 1981). It is easy to understand how the loss of a patient 
could result in distress for a nurse; but along with that distress, the death of a 
patient may also be appraised as positive. One study found that contrary to 
expectations, the variable "death-dying" had a significant positive relation-
ship with eustress and a nonsignificant relationship with distress. One inter-
pretation of this finding was that when nurses were faced with the demand 
of death-dying in their patients, they became significantly more engaged in 
their work (Simmons, 2000).
A meta-analysis of challenge stressors and hindrance stressors also reports 
this pattern of simultaneous positive and negative responses (Podsakoff et al., 
2007). Our model proposes that for any given demand, individual cognitive 
appraisals will typically identify aspects of both challenges and hindrances. As 
an illustration for a particular type of stressor, situational constraints will cer-
tainly be appraised as a hindrance by most individuals. Yet individuals with a 
positive core self-evaluation and access to other job resources might simulta-
neously find a motivational challenge in the same constraint.
Furthermore, workers can be engaged in their work and experience posi-
tive benefits even when confronted with extremely demanding stressors.  
A study of female and male soldiers participating in the U.S. peacekeeping 
mission in Bosnia found that soldiers who were engaged in meaningful work 
during the deployment found it to be a positive experience (Britt et al., 2001). 
Even such an extreme factor as witnessing the destruction caused by warring 
factions was associated with reporting positive benefits of the peacekeeping 
mission. In this context, destruction was likely seen as justification for the 
mission, which added meaning to the soldiers' work.
Indicators of Eustress
Positive and negative stress responses are separate, distinct, multidimensional, 
and potentially interactive in nature. To assume the presence of the positive 
by simply observing the absence of the negative, or vice versa, is an unaccept-
ably simplistic approach to understanding the sources, responses, and conse-
quences of stress. In other words, the full range of the stress response cannot be 
appreciated without a strategy to assess eustress and distress concurrently. 
Thus, each positive and negative stress response will have its own associated 
indicators or subdimensions.
Indicators of the stress response could be physiological, behavioral, or psy-
chological, though our model focuses only on psychological indicators. As 
Edwards and Cooper (1988) suggested, indicators of the positive response to 
stressors will be positive psychological states, and indicators of the negative 
70 
Simmons, Hanna, and Hu
response will be negative psychological states. Thus, consistent with the 
holistic representation of stress, eustress can be operationally defined as  
a positive psychological response to a stressor, as indicated by the presence 
of positive psychological states; distress can be operationally defined as a 
negative psychological response to a stressor, as indicated by the presence 
of negative psychological states (Simmons, 2000).
Because psychological states must be subject to change according to cognitive 
appraisals of stressors, stable dispositional variables are not acceptable indicators 
of eustress (or distress). Thus, work attitudes and emotions are preferable indi-
cators. Specifically, attitudes and emotions such as positive affect, meaningful-
ness, manageability, hope, and vigor may be good indicators of eustress 
(Simmons, 2000; Simmons & Nelson, 2001; Simmons et al., 2001). For example, 
positive affect reflects the extent to which a person feels enthusiastic, active, and 
alert (Watson et al., 1988) and is associated with seeing opportunity in an issue 
(Mittal & Ross, 1998), which could be an indicator of eustress following expo-
sure to an event. Likewise, manageability is the extent to which a person per-
ceives that resources at their disposal are adequate to meet the demands posed 
by a work situation (Simmons, 2000), which corresponds to a positive evalua-
tion of that situation.
Although conceptually distinct, these constructs all represent aspects of 
engagement, which itself includes another promising indicator of eustress. 
Job engagement is the simultaneous investment of cognitive, emotional, and 
physical presence into performing a work role (Kahn, 1990). Example items 
from Rich et al.'s (2010) measure of job engagement include: "At work,  
I focus a great deal of attention on my job" (cognitive), "I feel energetic at my 
job" (emotional), and "I try my hardest to perform well on my job" (physical). 
Antecedents of engagement include core self-evaluation, perceived organiza-
tional support, and value congruence (an aspect of P-E fit); and engagement 
predicts job performance and organizational citizenship behavior (Rich et al., 
2010). Our model suggests that individual differences, job resources, and P-E 
fit moderate the relationship between challenge and hindrance stressors and 
cognitive appraisals of those stressors; thus, due to similar linkages, engage-
ment likely plays a role in the stress process as well.
STRESS AND HEALTH
There is substantial evidence of the links between distress and ill health 
(O'Connor et al., 2021; Quick et al., 1997). Conversely, research evidence 
concerning eustress suggests that the positive stress experience can have 
ben-
eficial
 effects on health (Kupriyanov & Zhdanov, 2014). One review of the 
literature stated that "positive emotional states may promote healthy percep-
tions, beliefs, and physical well-being" (Salovey et al., 2000, p. 110). Like-
wise, after reviewing a variety of empirical findings, Edwards and Cooper 
(1988) found that the majority of evidence suggests a positive effect of eustress 
on health. The authors speculated that eustress may either improve health 
The Holistic Model of Stress
 71
directly through physiological changes or indirectly by reducing existing dis-
tress. More recently, Parker and Ragsdale (2015) found that within persons, 
employees' experiences of distress predicted higher fatigue both in the morning 
and later in the workday, whereas two indicators of eustress--happiness and 
meaningfulness--predicted lower fatigue at both times of day. These results 
suggest differential effects of experiencing distress versus eustress: eustress may 
replenish energy (Zohar et al., 2003) and may directly improve self-efficacy, 
which in turn helps develop a range of positive resources and better health 
experiences (Gross et al., 2011).
Several empirical studies hypothesized that, in response to demands, hos-
pital nurses would experience significant levels of both eustress and distress, 
and each stress response would have a separate effect on the nurses' percep-
tions of their health (Salovey et al., 2000). As hypothesized, even in the pres-
ence of a demanding work environment, nurses were actively engaged in 
their work and reported significant levels of eustress, and eustress in turn had 
a significant positive relationship with perceptions of their own health. 
Among all indicators of eustress, hope exhibited the strongest positive rela-
tionship with the nurses' perception of health. In addition to being healthy 
and productive themselves, eustressed nurses may have an increasingly posi-
tive effect on the health of patients by inspiring optimistic expectations and 
raising patients' levels of hope (Salovey et al., 2000).
Outside of the profession of nursing, it is likely that eustress has positive 
implications for the health of employees as well. Future research should con-
tinue to investigate the adaptive capacity of eustress for positive health out-
comes and subjective well-being (Kupriyanov & Zhdanov, 2014). In doing so, 
organizations can not only learn about the positive implications of eustress in 
their employees but also engage in practices to promote and extend experi-
ences of positive stress in the workplace.
MANAGING EUSTRESS AND DISTRESS
The research literature on work stress has focused strongly on pathology and on 
healing the wounded. The importance of this venture cannot be denied. Much 
has been learned about stressors, coping, and symptoms of distress, and great 
strides have been made in assisting both individuals and organizations in man-
aging distress. These milestones, however, represent only half the battle. As a 
complement to healing the wounded, we must also find ways of building and 
capitalizing on strengths. Distress prevention and eustress generation together 
provide a more holistic framework for managing occupational health issues.
Distress Prevention
One framework that allows for a comprehensive gathering of distress-focused 
interventions is preventive stress management, as originally proposed by Quick 
and Quick (1984) and elaborated on by Quick et al. (1997). Central to this 
72 
Simmons, Hanna, and Hu
philosophy is the idea that stress is inevitable but distress is not. Rooted in a 
public health framework, the three levels of preventive stress management are 
primary prevention, secondary prevention, and tertiary prevention.
Primary prevention is intended to reduce, change, or eliminate stressors 
and often includes job redesign or time management efforts. Karasek's (1979) 
job strain model, for example, indicates that it is possible to increase the demand 
level of a job without making it distressful, so long as job discretion is also 
increased. Beyond job redesign, primary prevention strategies also involve 
efforts to change individual perceptions of stressors, such as cognitive restruc-
turing and learned optimism that alter a person's internal self-talk.
When stressors cannot be eliminated through primary prevention, secondary 
prevention efforts are focused on modifying responses to stressors. For example, 
exercise, meditation, and other forms of relaxation and nutrition practices all 
focus on lowering the risk of disease following exposure to stressors. Notable  
among secondary prevention efforts is the work of Pennebaker and colleagues 
(e.g., Smyth & Pennebaker, 2001), which demonstrates the psychological and 
somatic health benefits of writing about traumatic events and stressors.
Finally, tertiary prevention is the most direct form of healing the wounds of 
distress once strains have developed over time. Specifically, tertiary prevention 
consists of professional help (e.g., counseling, physical therapy, medical treat-
ment) for symptoms of distress. Organizational efforts of tertiary prevention are 
often facilitated by employee assistance programs.
Eustress Generation
Overall, we can tell individuals and organizations a great deal about how to 
prevent or resolve distress. While coping consists of voluntary self-regulation 
processes that individuals engage in as part of their reactions to distress, the 
positive counterpart to coping--
savoring
--involves enjoying the positive 
response to stress and dwelling on it with satisfaction or delight (Nelson & 
Simmons, 2004). As a complement to preventing and coping with distress, 
our next task, and a formidable one, is to learn how to help individuals and 
organizations generate eustress and reap the resulting benefits of increased 
health, well-being, and performance.
JD-R theory suggests that job conditions can be characterized as either job 
demands or resources, and each triggers a unique psychological process 
(Demerouti et al., 2001). Job demands impose energy costs or depletion and 
have been found to be the strongest predictors of distress. In contrast, job and 
personal resources are associated with motivational processes that promote 
engagement (an indicator of eustress) and well-being (Bakker & Demerouti, 
2014), in addition to functioning as a buffer against the strain caused by 
demands. Said differently, high demands combined with low resources are a 
perfect recipe for distress, whereas high demands and high resources generate 
higher motivation (Demerouti & Bakker, 2011). Managers interested in eustress 
generation might start by identifying aspects of the work that help employees 
reserve and expand resources. Two popular concepts in positive psychology, 
The Holistic Model of Stress
 73
job crafting and positive emotion regulation, may be effective self-regulatory 
strategies for countering distressful demands and developing job and personal 
resources.
Job Crafting
According to JD-R, employees do not simply react to their environment and 
play defense to cope with stressful situations. Instead, they can proactively 
make changes and alter various elements of work with an aim to increase the 
fit between work demands and their individual needs and capabilities (Berg 
et al., 2008). This bottom-up, individual job redesign strategy is referred to as 
job crafting
 (Wrzesniewski & Dutton, 2001).
Job crafting is resource expansion-oriented and can focus on either job 
demands or resources. Specifically, seeking resources (e.g., asking for feed-
back, increasing job autonomy, learning new skills, building social networks), 
seeking challenges (e.g., asking for extra responsibility, taking on challenging 
tasks), and optimizing demands (e.g., active improvement of work processes 
for better efficiency; planning and prioritization) are all forms of job crafting 
(Costantini et al., 2021; Demerouti & Peeters, 2018). These proactive efforts 
help employees build job and personal resources and optimize resource mobi-
lization (Demerouti et al., 2015).
Job crafting leads to the accumulation of job and personal resources, which 
in turn helps enhance eustress in two ways. First, it serves an intrinsic motiva-
tional role and fulfills the basic human need for conserving and expanding 
valuable resources (Hobfoll, 2001). Second, this resource expansion plays an 
instrumental role in facilitating work task completion (Bakker & Demerouti, 
2017). Proactive job crafters are found to be more confident and creative in 
finding innovative ways to solve problems (Petrou et al., 2012). A longitudinal 
study by Vogt and colleagues (2016) found that resource-expansion behaviors 
such as job crafting have direct positive effects on individuals' psychological 
capital (hope, resilience, self-efficacy, and optimism), which in turn improves 
work engagement (an indicator of eustress). As a whole, job crafting is a useful 
self-regulatory strategy for employees to proactively create resourceful work 
conditions to stay stimulated and thrive. Employees engaged in job crafting 
behaviors are likely to be more engaged, satisfied, resilient, and thriving at work 
(Berg et al., 2008).
Nonetheless, not all jobs provide opportunities to engage in job crafting. In 
jobs that do not have a high degree of autonomy or control, organizations can 
still help facilitate individuals savor the positive response to stress. Eustress 
recognition and interest in eustress generation will always be individualistic, but 
organizations can teach employees to recognize positive responses to stress and 
engage in practices to extend these experiences to capitalize on their potential 
health benefits.
Positive Emotion Regulation
Emotion plays an integral role in stress experiences. Stressful events elicit 
complex emotional responses that involve negative and positive emotions 
74 
Simmons, Hanna, and Hu
(Folkman & Moskowitz, 2000) and both types of emotions play significant 
functional roles (Fredrickson, 1998). Negative emotions tend to trigger nar-
rowly focused action, whereas positive emotions foster cognitive and psycho-
logical flexibility and facilitate generativity, higher level connectivity, and 
exploration (Fredrickson, 1998). These emotional effects have significant impli-
cations for personal resource development and eustress generation. Empirical 
findings show that there is a direct link between the effects of positive  
emotions that accumulate and compound over time and sustained psycho-
logical resilience (an enduring personal resource) and human flourishing  
(Fredrickson, 2004).
Depending on the emotion strategy employed in the stress response, there 
could be two resulting paths: negative emotional experiences, which represent 
an energy and resource depletion path of distress; or positive emotional experi-
ences, which represent a resource development path of eustress (Quinones 
et al., 2017). Cultivating positive emotions through an emotion regulatory 
approach can be instrumental to effective stress management. Emotion regula-
tory behaviors have been known to help people sustain and maintain positive 
emotional experiences that are beneficial to well-being (Bryant, 2003), so emo-
tion regulation can play an important role in 
savoring
, or extending, eustress. 
Commonly recommended regulatory strategies include positive reappraisal 
(also known as deep acting) and infusing ordinary events with positive meaning 
(for a detailed review, see Folkman & Moskowitz, 2000). These cognitive and 
behavioral tools help maintain, prolong, and enhance positive emotion experi-
ences, which in turn expand attention scopes, foster creative thinking, build 
enduring and vital psychological resources (e.g., efficacy, optimism, resilience), 
and ultimately promote eustress over time (Aspinwall, 1998, 2001).
THE MULTIFACETED ROLE OF PERSON-ENVIRONMENT FIT IN THE 

STRESS PROCESS
P-E fit describes the match between a person's attributes and those of an envi-
ronment (Kristof-Brown et al., 2005). P-E fit can include many different indi-
vidual attributes, including biological and psychological needs, personality 
traits, vocational interests, values, goals, and abilities (Cable & Edwards, 2004; 
Kristof, 1996). We posit that P-E fit plays a unique and multifaceted role in 
the holistic model of stress in that it may take on the role of a stressor, an 
individual difference, or a facilitator of coping and/or savoring.
First, P-E fit has typically been included in the stress literature as a poten-
tial stressor. Theories of fit describe an 
adjustment process
 in which individuals 
should increase their fit with their work environment over time (Dawis & 
Lofquist, 1984; French et al., 1974), and this process is often driven by nega-
tive stress experiences as a result of misfit (Caplan, 1987; Edwards et al., 
1998). Specifically, when individuals are in environments that do not fit their 
values, interests, personality, abilities, or other needs, this misfit tends to pro-
duce stress. As a result, individuals will consciously or unconsciously undergo 
The Holistic Model of Stress
 75
efforts to alleviate that stress (i.e., engage in coping) by changing their own 
attributes, changing their environment, or both (Caplan, 1987; French et al., 
1974; Frese, 1982; Schneider, 1987).
Importantly, fit theories do not explicitly distinguish between distress and 
eustress, but misfit is often construed as undesirable, and adjustment processes 
typically refer to coping rather than savoring (Le Fevre et al., 2003). However, 
in light of the holistic model of stress (Figure 4.1), we propose that there are 
interesting opportunities to empirically examine misfit as a neutral stressor 
that may elicit distress, eustress, or both. For example, misfit may be in the 
form of either 
excess
 (i.e., the environment provides more of an attribute than 
the individual has or needs) or 
deficiency
 (i.e., the environment provides less 
of an attribute than the individual has or needs; Edwards & Parry, 1993; Wiegand 
et al., 2021). Previous research (e.g., Wiegand et al., 2021) has demonstrated 
that differential effects can result from different types of misfit: for example, 
outcomes like job satisfaction differ when people's interests are met and 
exceeded by their job, rather than under-supplied. These findings suggest that 
misfit may produce distress or eustress, depending on excess or deficiency. Like-
wise, when the demands of a job exceed a person's abilities, this may cause 
distress for the individual; on the other hand, when the person's abilities exceed 
the demands of their job, this may lead to eustress (Le Fevre et al., 2003).
Misfit may also simultaneously elicit distress and eustress. For instance,  
a person who values profits and success may experience misfit with an orga-
nization that donates a portion of their profits to environmental causes. That 
person may interpret this value misfit as both a hindrance (e.g., "My organi-
zation makes decisions that I do not agree with.") and a challenge (e.g.,  
"I should be more sensitive to prosocial causes, such as saving the environ-
ment"). Based on each of these possibilities, researchers should empirically 
test both eustress and distress following experiences of misfit, rather than 
assuming that misfit will elicit negative responses.
In addition to P-E fit as a stressor, we propose that fit may also serve as an 
individual difference that predisposes a person to experience eustress or dis-
tress in the face of other stressors. Various types of P-E fit are important pre-
dictors of outcomes such as work attitudes (Hoff et al., 2020; Kristof-Brown 
et al., 2005), job performance (Nye et al., 2012, 2017), and turnover inten-
tions (Kristof-Brown et al., 2005; Vancouver & Schmitt, 1991). As a result of 
these links, a person who "matches" their organization and job may be pre-
disposed to view stressors as motivational challenges that elicit eustress 
responses, whereas a misfitting individual may be more likely to experience 
distress. For example, a person who works in a job that matches their inter-
ests may be more likely to be satisfied in that job and perform well (Hoff et al., 
2020; Nye et al., 2012, 2017). If that person encounters stressors such as work 
overload or team pressures, they may view these stressors as opportunities to 
challenge themselves and perform at their best, whereas a person working in 
a job that does not match their interests may be more distressed as a result of 
those same demands. Despite its potential as a predisposition to stress responses, 
little empirical work has examined P-E fit as a moderator between exposure 
76 
Simmons, Hanna, and Hu
to stressors and experiences of distress and eustress. Similar to research on 
predispositions such as optimism (Peterson, 2000; Scheier & Carver, 1992) and 
hardiness (Florian et al., 1995; Kobasa et al., 1982), more research is needed 
to examine fit as a relevant individual difference characteristic following expo-
sure to a stressor.
P-E fit may also facilitate coping and/or savoring, which can affect the link 
between stress and various work outcomes. One study that tested P-E fit as a 
moderator of the relationship between stress responses and work outcomes 
found that fit can serve as a buffer to reduce the negative effects of distress 
(Chu, 2014). Specifically, perceptions of distress in a sample of nurses were 
positively related to work-family conflict and negatively related to mental 
health, but these relationships were weaker for nurses who had better P-E fit 
with their jobs. In other words, for individuals with good fit, there was still 
some level of perceived distress, but this distress had fewer negative down-
stream effects than it did for individuals with poor fit.
Aside from these findings, it is largely unknown how P-E fit can be used to 
strengthen coping and savoring processes. Because of adjustment processes in 
which individuals may strengthen their fit with their job and organization 
(Caplan, 1987; French et al., 1974; Frese, 1982; Schneider, 1987), there is 
certainly potential for these processes to involve coping and savoring in response 
to other stressors as well. As described earlier, one mechanism through which 
individuals may cope with misfit by changing their environment is job crafting 
(Tims et al., 2013). Given enough autonomy, individuals may actively work 
to change aspects of their job to help align their work environment with 
their own attributes (Li et al., 2022). In doing so, individuals may simulta-
neously engage in active coping strategies that relieve or enhance other 
stressors. For instance, by changing how a workday is structured, an employee 
may both increase demands-abilities fit (i.e., the match between employees' 
abilities and the demands of their job; Kristof, 1996) and reduce role demands 
that were causing distress. Future research can further explore the possible 
role of P-E fit in facilitating such coping or savoring processes, as well as 
potential applications of fit in workshops designed to teach coping and savoring 
strategies.
METHODOLOGICAL CHALLENGES IN THE STUDY OF EUSTRESS
There are a number of methodological considerations in the stress literature, 
particularly when studying the positive experiences of eustress and savoring. 
First, an important consideration deals with the valence of psychological 
states and the need to conceptualize different valences on separate contin-
uums, rather than bipolar ends of the same spectrum (e.g., positive affect vs. 
negative affect; Russell & Carroll, 1999). Likewise, one of the most promi-
nent methodological challenges is that few measures are explicitly designed  
to capture the experience of eustress (Branson et  al., 2019; Rodriguez 
et al., 2013). Because a person may experience a single stressor as both a 
The Holistic Model of Stress
 77
positive challenge and a negative demand (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984; Van den 
Broeck et  al., 2010), measures including items that address positive stress 
experiences are necessary. These measures allow for the evaluation of simul-
taneous experiences of distress and eustress following exposure to a neutral 
stressor, rather than treating eustress as the 
opposite
 of distress. Due to the lack 
of currently available measures, some researchers have undertaken efforts to 
develop their own measures with items designed for a particular study's goals 
(e.g., Cavanaugh et al., 2000; O'Sullivan, 2011). Nonetheless, more research on 
these measures is needed to advance the study of eustress and savoring, as well 
as more efforts to develop validated measures with high degrees of reliability.
Alternatively, factor analytic techniques may be used to conceptualize 
eustress as a higher order construct defined by other existing constructs such 
as hope, meaningfulness, vigor, and manageability (Simmons, 2000). This 
conceptualization via established, lower order constructs treats the higher 
order construct of eustress at a higher level of abstraction than the lower sub-
dimension constructs (Crede & Harms, 2015; Sarstedt et  al., 2019). This 
approach may complicate the construct validity regarding the definition of 
eustress and whether the measures truly reflect the construct as defined 
(Johnson et al., 2011). For example, whether eustress should be considered 
as more abstract than concepts like hope and vigor is a theoretical question. 
Higher order constructs are typically proposed because there is observed 
covariation among several existing constructs (Crede & Harms, 2015), rather 
than imposing a higher order factor analytic model to capture a construct that 
already exists on its own, such as eustress.
The use of higher order factor analysis also presents its own methodological 
challenges. Due to the complexity of such a model, researchers may experience 
convergence issues, and large samples are needed to test such models. As 
opposed to a direct measure of eustress, this method also requires empirical 
measurement of all indicator variables, which can induce survey fatigue due 
to the high number of items (Le et al., 2021).
Nonetheless, higher order factor analysis is a preferable method to concep-
tualize eustress compared with using a measure designed to assess distress, and 
this approach offers several advantages. For instance, building higher order, 
multidimensional constructs capitalizes on the bandwidth-fidelity argument 
that broader constructs are better predictors of other broad, multidimensional 
constructs (Jenkins & Griffith, 2004; Johnson et al., 2011). Additionally, when 
a set of variables all predict similar outcomes, it is more parsimonious to examine 
their common variance, which is captured by the higher order construct (Crede 
& Harms, 2015; Johnson et al., 2011).
Researchers choosing to conceptualize eustress as a higher order latent 
factor should follow recommendations to improve the construct validity and 
criterion-related validity of eustress, such as those outlined by Johnson and 
colleagues (2011): utilization of explicit inclusion criteria for the lower order 
factors (e.g., theoretical reasoning, a priori empirical factor loading cutoffs),  
a priori specification of the nature of the relations between the lower order con-
structs and the higher order eustress construct, ruling out potential alternative 
78 
Simmons, Hanna, and Hu
explanations for the emergence of eustress as the source of shared variance 
among the indicators (e.g., common method variance; Podsakoff et al., 2003), 
and demonstrating increased incremental prediction of outcomes from eustress 
compared with the lower order factors. Other such recommendations are 
presented by Crede and Harms (2015). Additionally, as more validated measures 
of eustress emerge, there will be interesting opportunities to explore com-
peting models in which other psychological states are used as predictors of 
eustress, compared to indicators that define eustress.
Whether higher order factor analysis or an explicit, direct measure of 
eustress is used, it is important to conceptualize eustress as a psychological 
state that is experienced in a given moment as the result of a particular event. 
To capture in-the-moment psychological experiences, studies of eustress 
should ideally avoid cross-sectional designs. Experience sampling method-
ology, for example, provides an intriguing lens for studying stressors, eustress, 
and savoring as employees experience them at work (Rodell & Judge, 2009). 
Alternatively, field experiments could be used to study the causal mechanisms 
driving simultaneous experiences of distress and eustress, and longitudinal 
studies can track coping and savoring processes over time.
Along similar lines, interventions designed to promote primary eustress 
generation may also take the form of field experiments that include pre- and 
posttests with a control group to compare positive stress experiences before 
and after exposure to a stimulus. Otherwise, researchers may choose a longi-
tudinal framework to understand how an intervention takes effect over time. 
These methods can help rule out threats to valid inferences, such as the 
Hawthorne effect (i.e., employees demonstrate positive psychological states 
simply because there are changes being made to their environment and work 
conditions, rather than states caused by the intervention). It is also possible 
that employees may experience something similar to a hedonic treadmill 
effect, in which there is an initial increase in eustress following an intervention, 
but over time employees return to their baseline psychological state and do 
not engage in savoring processes. For these reasons, longitudinal follow-ups 
are highly encouraged to understand the maintenance and longevity of effects 
from primary eustress generation efforts.
Finally, savoring, or the positive counterpart to coping, is a dynamic pro-
cess that should unfold over time (see Figure 4.1). After an individual encoun-
ters a neutral stressor, that individual may experience eustress, distress, or 
both. Following an experience of eustress, the individual can savor and enjoy 
the positive experience of stress and may purposefully attempt to make that 
positive experience last longer (Nelson & Simmons, 2004; Peterson, 2006). 
Thus, savoring involves some level of self-awareness in order to understand 
that one is experiencing eustress. Individuals may lack this self-awareness or 
self-insight (Reilly & Doherty, 1989), in which case savoring will be difficult 
to measure, as well as difficult to train or enhance. This may be particularly true 
in cases when an individual simultaneously experiences eustress and distress, in 
which case the distress may be more salient due to its negative valence (Kanar 
et al., 2010). Researchers can develop interventions and training programs 
The Holistic Model of Stress
 79
designed to teach employees how to recognize times in which they experi-
ence positive states of stress, the beneficial results that may arise from these 
experiences, and methods to savor those experiences to increase the likeli-
hood of subsequent positive outcomes.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, the holistic model of work stress presented here offers employees 
and organizations a framework to better understand how demands and stressors 
affect health and performance in the workplace. In line with the principles 
articulated by the JD-R model (Demerouti et al., 2001), distress and eustress 
capture the dual pathways of employees' stress experiences. Organizations can 
play a significant role in providing meaningful resources and helping employees 
build resilience in the face of challenges, particularly through facilitation of job 
crafting opportunities, providing training on emotion regulation and savoring, 
and promoting cultures of positive P-E fit through recruitment, hiring, and 
employee development initiatives (Hargrove et al., 2015).
As a result of these efforts, employees' stress response strategies of savoring 
eustress and coping with distress can manifest in employee outcomes that 
matter and result in sustained competitive advantage for organizations. 
Thus, a wide variety of outcomes may be further investigated in future work, 
including employees' positive and negative evaluations and feelings about 
their work (Warr, 2013), consistent and sustained levels of employee job 
performance following coping and savoring (Hargrove et al., 2015), reduc-
tions in employee withdrawal behaviors and eventual turnover, employees' 
organizational citizenship behaviors, and long-term experiences of subjective 
well-being and health implications following stress responses (Kupriyanov & 
Zhdanov, 2014).
