Identifying and Refining 

Your Individualized Learning 

Objective
Daryl Chow, Scott D. Miller, and Mark A. Hubble
2
Truth, like gold, is to be obtained not by its growth, but by washing away from it all that 
is not gold.
--LEO TOLSTOY, 
TOLSTOY'S DIARIES
DECISION POINT
Begin here if you have read the book 
Better Results
 and
*  are routinely measuring your performance 
and
*  have collected sufficient data to establish a reliable, evidence-based profile 
of your therapeutic effectiveness 
or
*  have created a map or blueprint of how you work sufficiently detailed  
another clinician could step into your shoes 
and
*  need guidance using the Taxonomy of Deliberate Practice Activities in  
Psychotherapy to identify or refine an individualized learning objective with 
the greatest chance of improving your effectiveness.
26 
Chow, Miller, and Hubble
T
o begin, please rate your response to each of the following questions on 
a scale from 1 to 5, where 1 is 
highly disagree
 and 5 
highly agree
:
* You are someone who is often attuned to the feelings of others.
* You are someone who approaches life, work, and problems systematically 
and sequentially, often having clearly defined steps and procedures in mind 
(i.e., "If x, then y").
Not surprisingly, psychotherapists tend to assign a 4 or 5 to the first state-
ment and lower scores to the second. Clearly, possessing an empathic disposition 
helps in fulfilling the desire to be of assistance to people in distress. Being 
in the moment, emphasizing understanding and acceptance, placing trust in 
feelings, and relying on intuition to guide decision making are often given 
priority in the daily conduct of therapy. Carefully constructing a treatment 
plan, following an established protocol, and being able to state clearly and 
explicitly the rationale for each and every action taken with clients is less 
common. On balance, therapists are more 
empathizers
 than 
systemizers
.
As it is, being completely immersed in and sharply attuned to the client's 
experience has long been regarded as the sine qua non of expert clinical work. 
Indeed, a large multinational investigation by the University of Chicago's David 
Orlinsky and the University of Oslo's Michael Ronnestad (2005), involving 
more than 10,000 therapists, found the majority not only yearn for but also 
consider the experience of connecting deeply with clients the quintessence of 
what it means to be a therapist. For all that, 
healing involvement
--the term used 
by researchers to characterize this belief and desire--has a curious relation-
ship with results. The more it is valued, the 
less
 effective one is likely to be. 
In reality, the best clinicians rate it significantly less important to their work 
and identity than their more average counterparts (Chow, 2014). What holds 
their attention and gets them up and going in the morning? Outcome.
Enter the Taxonomy of Deliberate Practice Activities in Psychotherapy 
(TDPA; Chow & Miller, 2022; see Appendix A, this volume), the tool specifi-
cally designed to help practitioners develop a step-by-step professional devel-
opment plan most likely to improve their results. Unfortunately, a cursory 
review of the document is likely to strike empathizers as, in a word, foreign. 
A spreadsheet of tables, ratings, and detailed instructions has replaced what 
they do best, know the most about, and hold in the highest esteem: connec-
tion, caring, intuition, and being in the moment. How can the seemingly 
detached, calculating, even antiseptic nature of the TDPA be experienced as 
anything other than off-putting?
Turns out, the answer--and the way forward--lies in redefining what 
healing involvement encompasses. Nowhere is the need to do so more apparent 
than in efforts to address the epidemic levels of burnout seen in the helping 
professions. The terms 
vicarious trauma
, 
secondary traumatic stress
, and especially 
compassion fatigue
 all point to the very real risks of deriving meaning and purpose 
primarily from the emotionally charged interactions during the therapy hour--
especially with nonimproving clients. The pattern is as easy to see as the results 
Identifying and Refining Your Individualized Learning Objective
 27
are predictable: In the face of continued suffering, deepening involvement 
feels like the right thing to do.
And yet, as Mathieu and colleagues (2015) pointed out, "Burnout doesn't 
begin with caring, or even caring too much, but continuing to care 
ineffectively
[emphasis added], losing sight of what we're there to accomplish with our 
clients in the first place" (p. 22). Little wonder the panoply of recommendations 
offered by burnout experts--including cultivating mindfulness, going on walks, 
doing yoga, joining a service organization, turning off technology, capping 
client contact hours, and eliminating caffeine and alcohol intake--do not work. 
All miss that key protective factor--doing something that 
actually helps
. Recall 
feeling effective is so crucial to the well-being of therapists, they routinely over-
estimate their actual results (see Chow et al., 2015; Lin et al., 2022; Walfish 
et al., 2012)!
Thus, it is essential for the definition of healing involvement to be extended 
beyond the immediate experience with the client to therapists' deeply felt desire 
to be of help. With this perspective in mind, "empathizers" can transform the 
TDPA from a mere chore to a deep and powerful act of caring. At this stage, 
it is recommended therapists work consciously and intentionally at developing 
a relationship, with achieving better results equal to the relationships one works 
so hard to establish and maintain with clients.
FIELD GUIDE TIP
Readers who scored a 4 or 5 on the 
second statement (i.e., systemizer) 
or who, after reading 
Better Results
(Miller et al., 2020), are now looking 
for tips, suggestions, and practical 
guidance for maximizing the utility  
of the TDPA may feel free to skip 
ahead to the exercises at the end  
of this chapter.
BARRIERS TO BETTER RESULTS
To be clear, it is not that therapists do 
not
 want to improve. They do. The 
evidence reviewed in Chapter 12 of 
Better Results
 (
BR
; Miller et al., 2020) 
proves it. However, for empathizers and systemizers alike, three obstacles 
get in the way of deepening their relationship with better results:
* what therapists already believe works,
* not knowing what will work to improve their effectiveness, and
* what others insist works if only everyone would do it.
28 
Chow, Miller, and Hubble
Regarding the last item on the list, nothing beyond the decades of research 
reviewed in Chapter 2 of 
BR
 and the first chapter of this volume need be 
repeated. The desire to help those in psychological pain is easily exploited by 
those promising a better way. In the busy, time-and-resource-limited world in 
which clinicians work, one of the major hooks is, "The heavy lifting has been 
done. All you need to do is follow directions." If this remains a temptation, 
complete the exercises on page 17 of Chapter 1 under Principle 1 (Avoid the 
Athenian Trap).
Turning to the first item, the evidence paints a rather bleak picture. Despite 
participating in continuing education throughout one's career, clinician confi-
dence increases but their outcomes do not (Germer et al., 2022; Goldberg 
et al., 2016). Effective deliberate practice (DP) is predicated on developing 
an evidence-based profile of each therapist's effectiveness. The goal is to 
strengthen what one does well and target particular weaknesses for improve-
ment. In either case, the expertise literature definitively shows intuition is not 
a reliable guide (Miller et al., 2018).
Finally, not knowing what to work on is a major obstacle--perhaps the 
biggest. It is also the reason for and purpose of this chapter. Consider the data 
presented in Figure 2.1. Displayed are the responses of hundreds of participants 
from an ongoing series of asynchronous, web-based trainings on DP conducted 
by the authors since the publication of 
BR.
 Asked at the outset of the course 
to identify the single biggest challenge attendees faced in their professional 
development, the majority (
~
38%) cited not knowing which goals or perfor-
mance objectives to pursue.
The promise of the TDPA (as originally introduced in 
BR
) was that completing 
the tool would help each therapist identify the specific DP activity exerting 
the greatest leverage on improving their results (McChesney et al., 2012). 
Experience showed clinicians needed more. Putting all the pieces together 
and arriving at a single professional development objective proved to be a 
FIGURE 2.1.
 Responses From Deliberate Practice Web-Based Workshop
Identifying and Refining Your Individualized Learning Objective
 29
"bridge too far," at times eluding even the most dedicated. The sheer volume 
of information made it easy to get lost in the details, obscuring connections 
between the various inputs and, ultimately, the bigger picture.
KEEPING THE BIGGER PICTURE IN MIND
Step back for a moment. The journey is a series of steps for deepening involve-
ment with better results, beginning with creating a detailed blueprint of how 
one works (see Figure 2.2). Recall the blueprint is a guide on "how you do, 
what you do" in therapy. A useful way to think about this is to imagine 
explaining to someone what you do within the therapy hour. As introduced 
in 
BR
 and thoroughly described in Chapter  1 of this field guide (
FG
), the 
reason for doing so is to enable the clinician to pinpoint where in their work 
they can intervene once they have identified what needs to change. The next 
step is measurement, routinely assessing engagement and outcome. The purpose 
is to generate data sufficient for the therapist to identify any weaknesses or 
deficits in their clinical performance. Once known, completing the TDPA is 
supposed to, first, help the therapist link their specific shortcomings to the 
factor or factors (and associated clinical activities) having the greatest chance 
of improving their results and, second, to develop a single, well-defined, and 
achievable professional development goal.
All well and good. Except . . .
Integrating data about one's performance deficits with the TDPA is where 
many end up feeling stuck. Consider the example of Liam.
1
 First, he created 
a blueprint for his approach to clinical work. It took a while to fill in the 
details over time as he reflected on and conducted therapy. At the same time, 
Note.
 TDPA 
=
 Taxonomy of Deliberate Practice Activities in Psychotherapy.
FIGURE 2.2.
 The Deliberate Practice Journey
1
All case examples used in the 
FG
 are composites of real people whose identifying 
information has been altered to ensure anonymity.
30 
Chow, Miller, and Hubble
he began administering standardized measures to his clients. Once sufficient 
data were gathered for a reliable assessment of his work, he learned his 
impact--as reflected in his effect size--was average. Wanting to improve 
nonetheless, he turned to the TDPA. Instead of leading him to a specific target 
for DP, variable scores within each of the five factors (i.e., structure, hope and 
expectancy, relationship, client, therapist) left him puzzled about where to 
start. Frustrated, he turned to colleagues in his consultation group: "What 
am I supposed to do to get better?"
Experience shows Liam's struggle is far from unusual. Recall most therapists 
are average. As such, an 
initial
 examination of one's overall results often fails 
to reveal the one truly transformative DP objective. Instead of returning to 
the data with different and more detailed questions, many place their trust 
in the TDPA, hoping it will provide direction. Occasionally, when completed 
together with a coach, potential targets for improvement are identified. How-
ever, more often than not--as in the case of Liam--nothing specific stands out. 
In either instance, disconnected from performance data, both risk investing 
significant effort for an unknown return.
Recalling the advice offered earlier, the key to success is to treat the pro-
cess of arriving at a performance improvement objective the same way one 
approaches working with clients. Get involved. Dive in, care, be curious, make 
connections, think critically, test understandings, continuously adapt, and, 
when required, seek consultation. No therapist thinks of "getting to know" 
the client as an activity independent of treatment. Similarly, learning what one 
needs to learn (and learn next) is not a precursor to but an integral part of DP. 
Practically speaking, this means returning to earlier steps as often as needed 
with different questions in mind:
* Is my blueprint accurate? Does it reliably capture how I work?
* Have I created an atmosphere that supports and facilitates candid feedback 
from clients? How do I use client feedback to inform and improve my work?
* How well do I understand my performance-related data? What gives rise to 
the numbers in the report? What variations in my performance (e.g., types 
of clients, presenting concerns, times of day, days of the week, treatment 
delivery format) might be hidden in the aggregate statistics?
* How does the information from my map, ongoing measurement, perfor-
mance data, and the TDPA tie together? What am I learning about myself, 
how I work, with whom, and under what circumstances I am most and 
least effective?
Liam sought out a coach who encouraged him to set aside the TDPA tempo-
rarily and revisit his performance data. Specifically, as suggested in Chapter 10 
of 
BR
, he was encouraged to begin parsing his outcomes, linking them to a 
variety of factors known to be associated with variations in therapist effectiveness 
(i.e., level of client distress, amount of improvement over time, culture, gender 
or sexual orientation, quality of the alliance, and presenting problem).
Identifying and Refining Your Individualized Learning Objective
 31
To this end, Liam created a spreadsheet. 
On the vertical axis, he listed his clients and, 
horizontally, the various factors. It took him 
the better part of a month to pull the specific 
data points for each client and place them in 
the appropriate column and row. Importantly, 
as he did so, he had no preconceived ideas 
about what he might find. Once complete, 
however, a pattern imme diately jumped out. 
His poorest outcomes occurred with men. 
"Was this the answer?" he wondered. "Should 
I get some training on 'men's' issues? Super-
vision?" Feeling uncertain, he returned to 
the coach.
Together, they first examined the other dimensions in the spreadsheet, 
looking for connections and relationships. No other patterns stood out. The 
poor results weren't linked to the alliance, presenting problem, or differences 
in background or culture. Simply put, some men fared worse than others. 
"So, what is it I'm supposed to practice?" Liam asked, exasperated. The coach 
immediately replied, "Being curious. We're not done getting to know these 
men, what happens when you are with them, what it is about them." It was 
then the coach suggested Liam add a column to his spreadsheet. There, he was 
instructed to review his progress notes, tracking any recurring words used when 
documenting his work.
"I've figured it out!" Liam happily reported the following month: "I need 
to deliberately practice working with angry men--that's the word that showed 
up again and again in my notes: angry." Liam's experience highlights the 
need to modify the picture most people have of DP (see Figure 2.3). Rarely 
linear and sequential, more often than not, it is a matter of three steps forward 
and two back--and Liam had a couple more steps back ahead of him.
Retrieving the TDPA, the coach wondered how best to understand the anger 
reported in Liam's notes. Was a description of the men, their nature, and how 
they presented a client factor? Or was it a result of something taking place 
in the therapeutic interaction (i.e., relationship factor)? There is one more 
FIGURE 2.3.
 Deliberate Practice: What People Think and What It Really 
Looks Like
32 
Chow, Miller, and Hubble
possibility: Was it a therapist factor? Did Liam somehow evoke an angry 
response from certain men? If so, what was it about him?
With these questions in mind, Liam returned to his notes. In short order, 
he discovered the problem was not "angry men." Rather, those with the poorest 
results 
became
 angry when they were not getting what they wanted: advice 
and direction, two activities conspicuously missing in Liam's blueprint.
"I'm not comfortable telling people what to do," he observed at the next 
session with his coach, adding, "In fact, I was trained 
not
 to do that." At this 
point, and after months of work, a DP objective likely to have leverage on 
Liam's outcomes started to emerge. Along the way, several shifts in perspec-
tive had occurred. What began abstractly as "men's issues" (TDPA Dimension 4) 
turned into "relating to angry men" (Dimension 3, Di, ii) but eventually landed 
on the necessity of being aware of and accommodating the expectations of 
certain men (Dimension 4b, c). With the correct focus sorted, Liam was finally 
able to act, devoting attention to learning when, with whom, and under 
what circumstances being more direct and offering specific guidance were 
indicated. In time, he modified his therapeutic map to reflect his new 
understandings.
PRINCIPLES FOR IDENTIFYING AND REFINING YOUR 

INDIVIDUALIZED LEARNING OBJECTIVE
Three principles essential to developing a learning objective with the greatest 
chance of improving your effectiveness are suggested. Derived from expe-
riences working with clinicians like Liam since the publication of 
BR
, they 
include
* approaching finding your performance improvement objective with the 
same interest and dedication you devote to understanding your clients,
* treating the process of arriving at your performance improvement objective 
as an ongoing learning project, and
* focusing on the "what," and the "know-how" will follow.
Up to this point, the aim of the entire chapter has been operationalizing 
the first two principles--what identifying your specific performance objective 
actually
 entails and the perspective required to sustain your efforts along the 
way. What more can be said? Like getting to know your clients, no shortcuts 
exist. Hopefully, it is clear DP is not an event (or even a series of discrete 
events). It is an ongoing, 
iterative
 process. Arrival is not possible without the 
journey--and in the case of working to achieve better results, it is best to think 
of the two as one and the same. You are here now. What are you learning? 
What is next?
Whereas the first two principles direct attention to the importance of 
attitude, Principle 3 is less about one's point of view than how the task is best 
Identifying and Refining Your Individualized Learning Objective
 33
approached. Toward this end, a specific framework for conceptualizing and 
organizing your efforts to identify the "what" and "how" to DP has proven 
useful. Known by the acronym OPL, it contains three elements: outcome goal, 
process goal, and learning project (see Figure 2.4).
Of the three, the learning project has already been introduced and illus-
trated with an example. Its purpose is to fill in gaps in knowledge. Its nature 
is dynamic, flexible, and exploratory. That said, effective learning projects 
share three qualities. First, the environment is conducive to learning and 
relearning, retrieving and reflecting on prior knowledge, and ultimately 
transferring what is being learned into clinical practice (Ahrens, 2017; Chow, 
2019a; Haskell, 2001). As recommended in 
BR
, one important strategy is 
actively working to protect the time one sets aside for DP (e.g., turning off the 
phone, social media, and email notifications, including other interruptions). 
Second, effective learning projects are open to a wide variety of inputs. That 
means looking beyond the world of therapy for inspiration and guidance. For 
example, if creating more effective structure in sessions is the objective, 
"know-how" might come from a colleague or therapy book but also from 
watching a documentary on how filmmakers craft the narrative arch of a story 
to create emotional impact. Third, and last, mindful of "Parkinson's Law"--
the danger that when left open-ended, work will expand to fill the time 
allotted--the most productive learning projects are time bound. As simplistic 
as it may seem, Liam was given specific tasks to complete within a given 
period, allowing him and his coach to monitor progress easily, make needed 
"just-in-time" adjustments, and plan the next steps.
It goes without saying that learning projects are goal directed. Goals both 
inform and determine the learning project. Returning to Figure 2.4, the first, 
or outcome goal, is "what" one aims to achieve in the learning project. Recall 
that Liam's initial objective was to improve his results. When his attention 
shifted to the "how," or process goal, the initial outcome goal evolved--first, 
from improving results with men to becoming eventually more comfortable 
and skilled in working with men who wanted and expected direction and 
advice. Once clear, the items listed in the TDPA provide numerous evidence- 
based suggestions for effective action. As portrayed in the graphic, think of the 
process goal as a lever. Its purpose is to provide the structure (i.e., lift) to reach 
the desired outcome.
FIGURE 2.4.
 The OPL Framework
34 
Chow, Miller, and Hubble
PRINCIPLE-BASED EXERCISES
Before considering the following exercises, ensure you have taken all the 
steps outlined in the decision tree presented at the start of this chapter. It is 
assumed you (a) are routinely measuring your performance; (b) have collected 
sufficient data to establish a reliable, evidence-based profile of your thera-
peutic effectiveness; (c) have created a map or blueprint sufficiently detailed 
so that another clinician could replicate your work; and (d) have tried to 
complete the TDPA but want additional help to develop the learning objective 
with the greatest chance of improving your effectiveness.
Have your outcome data, blueprint, and TDPA in front of you while deter-
mining which ones will work best for you. If, after considering the suggested 
exercises, you still find yourself struggling with outcome goals, process goals, 
and a learning project, consult the suggestions and detailed case example at 
the end of the chapter.
Exercise 1: Connecting With Your Authentic Self
Principle: 1
Applicability: TDPA Items 3Aiv, 3Biv, 5Avi
Purpose
People routinely equate authenticity with acting in a manner consistent with 
their 
actual
 selves. For all that, research indicates the experience most often 
arises when we think and act in ways consistent with our 
ideal
 self (Gan & 
Chen, 2017). As already stated, for many psychotherapists--especially those 
who principally see themselves as empathizers--data, statistics, and perfor-
mance metrics evoke strong feelings of "not me." This exercise is designed to 
honor and reconnect you with the ideals that brought you to the field--being 
of service to others.
Task

Part 1.
 Set aside 20 minutes once or twice a week for 1 month to think about a 
person you hold in high esteem because of who they are and what they do. It 
could be anyone from any domain of human performance--an athlete, scien-
tist, musician, philanthropist, a person from the present, or perhaps a historical 
figure. "Spend time with them" by looking up their accomplishments, listening 
to interviews, watching videos online, reading a biography, or imagining a con-
versation with them. Complete this part of the exercise before reading further.
Part 2.
 After a month, devote the same amount of time over several weeks 
to imagining how others would know that data-driven DP is part of your ideal 
self. Using paper and pencil or your favorite note-keeping app, maintain a 
record of your thoughts and reflections. Be as specific as possible about what 
you would be doing; how others would know your work with statistics, metrics, 
and data is critical to being the most helpful you can be. Last, make engaging in 
this exercise routine.
Identifying and Refining Your Individualized Learning Objective
 35
Exercise 2: Recovering Your "University Days" Mindset
Principle: 2
Applicability: Potentially All Items on the TDPA
Purpose
Going to college is more than earning a degree and getting a job. It's about 
exploration, self-discovery, learning to tolerate boredom, being exposed to 
diverse peoples and ideas, making friends, falling in love, and having fun. It is 
noteworthy that most who start end up studying a subject entirely different 
from what they originally planned--around 80%, actually (The University of 
Tulsa, 2020). Such shifts in interest and focus are both difficult to anticipate 
and far from an indication of failure, given their dependence on chance and 
experience. Of course, graduation is the ultimate objective (i.e., outcome goal). 
And yet, relishing the journey--its fits and starts, ups and downs, twists and 
turns--makes earning a degree rewarding and transformational. The same 
may be said of DP.
Task

Part 1.
 Set aside 20 minutes once or twice a week for 1 month to think about 
a person, class, relationship, book, time of life, or event that unexpectedly but 
positively impacted the direction of your career and life. Keep a log of your 
reflections, noting the circumstances, any challenges arising from the change 
in direction, and what was required of you to step off your then-current path 
and make it so (see Exercise 7). Consider how the change both confirmed or 
disrupted your sense of self up to that time.
Part 2.
 When it comes to your DP learning project, suspend the desire for an 
immediate result (i.e., being given a degree before the education). Cultivate 
a "university mindset." For the following month, be open to chance change- 
producing events, people, and experiences related to your desire to improve your 
therapeutic effectiveness. Keep a log using index cards or a note-keeping app. 
Return to this exercise whenever you embark on a new learning project.
Exercise 3: Specifying the Outcome Goal
Principle: 2, 3
Applicability: Potentially All Items on the TDPA
Purpose
The purpose of DP is different from attempting to resolve a difficult or "stuck" 
case. The latter is typically focused on anomalies or outliers, one-off experi-
ences from which little can be learned or applied to other clients and contexts 
(in 
BR,
 referred to as random errors). The former is about identifying and 
addressing recurring patterns in one's behavior that consistently undermine 
effective performance (i.e., nonrandom errors). Doing so requires gathering 
data via routine outcome monitoring sufficient to offer a reliable and valid 
profile of one's strengths and weaknesses. Once done, patterns can be extracted 
and effectively targeted for performance improvement.
36 
Chow, Miller, and Hubble
Task

Part 1.
 Solve for patterns. After you have collected outcome and relationship 
data on 40 to 60 cases:
1. Using "closed" cases only, partition your outcome data into "successful" 
versus "unsuccessful" groups.
2. Study the two groups, looking for differences (gender, age, presenting prob-
lem, strength of the relationship, amount and trajectory of change, consis-
tencies in your thinking and feeling about the clients).
3. Spend no more than 20 minutes at any one sitting, allowing time in between 
for the information to "percolate." Jot down any observations, thoughts, 
or "aha's" that occur to you during the time away.
Part 2.
 The next step is separating committed from aspirational outcome goals. 
To do so,
1. List all potential targets for DP (i.e., outcome goals) based on the analysis 
completed in Part 1.
2. Compare your results with the performance benchmarks (
BR
, pages 74-75).
3. Get as specific as possible. For example,
 - Reduce my youth population dropout rates from 47% to below 20%.
 - Reduce deterioration rates for men from 12% to 6%.
 - Reduce the rates of clients who make an unplanned termination after 
the first session from 35% to 20%.
 - Improve the rate of reliable change improvement for clients who have 
not experienced improvement after being seen for more than six sessions 
from 50% to 60%.
4. Commit to one outcome goal, temporarily designating all others aspira-
tional (Doerr, 2018). The one committed outcome goal is the single target 
to which you will devote your efforts. (The next exercises will help identify 
and refine the process goal and learning project.) A good rule to follow is 
picking "low hanging fruit"--something that has high leverage on improving 
your overall effectiveness while also being easy to reach.
Exercise 4: Figuring out Your Process Goal
Principle: 2, 3
Applicability: Potentially All Items on the TDPA
Purpose
Once you know your "what," the TDPA is specifically designed to help you 
figure out the "how" (i.e., your process goal). On the basis of feedback from 
therapists since the publication of 
BR
 and the research reviewed in the 
FG
, 
significant revisions have been made to the tool.
Identifying and Refining Your Individualized Learning Objective
 37
Task
With your outcome goal in mind, review the latest version of the TDPA, taking 
time to
1. Rate each item. Spending time reviewing case notes from active clients will 
ensure accuracy and representativeness.
2. Go through the document and identify the top three activities you believe 
will have the greatest impact on your results.
3. Select one to work on now, making sure it is 
influenceable
 and 
predictive
 of 
the outcome goal you've listed (see Figure 2.5).
4. Have a coach or expert--someone who knows your work--complete the 
Supervisor/Coach version of the TDPA and compare the ratings. Work 
together to identify and design a single process goal.
Exercise 5: Antigoals
Principle: 2
Applicability: Potentially All Items on the TDPA
Purpose
Being clear about what is unimportant in our efforts to improve can be a 
powerful way to achieve clarity and maintain focus on our process goal.
Task
This exercise is simple yet effective. Review your completed TDPA, making a 
list of the items (and factors) that will 
not
 be a part of your primary process 
goal. Keep the list handy, reviewing it whenever you are tempted to pursue 
training or activities (outside of playful experimentations and just having fun) 
unrelated or tangential to your current process goal.
FIGURE 2.5.
 Influencing Outcome With a Process That Is Predictive and 
Influenceable
38 
Chow, Miller, and Hubble
Exercise 6: Create a Centralized Note-Taking System
Principle: 1, 2, 3
Applicability: Potentially All Items on the TDPA
Purpose
Journaling and note taking, research indicates, has multiple benefits. A study 
in the 
Journal of Experimental Psychology
, for example, found it reduced intru-
sive and avoidant thoughts about negative events while improving working 
memory (Klein & Boals, 2001). Such improvements, it is believed, free up 
precious (and limited) cognitive resources to focus on other mental activities 
(e.g., managing stress, maintaining focus, learning). While popular in the 
treatment and self-help literature, the benefits for anyone engaging in DP could 
not be clearer. Keeping a consistent and "centralized" (i.e., one fixed note-
taking location) record helps in the recollection, organization, and consolidation 
of new learnings (Agarwal & Bain, 2019; Chow, 2019a; Miller et al., 2020). 
On the flip side, the lack of a centralized note-taking system is often a barrier 
to accelerated learning.
Task

Part 1.
 Determine how you will keep a record of your DP efforts (e.g., hand-
written, using a note-taking app). In this record, document your experiences, 
including those that might strike you as irrelevant to your current learning 
project. Treat your record as a garden you must seed, nurture, nourish, and 
prune on an ongoing basis to bear fruit.
Here are some tips that others have found helpful:
* If you decide to keep handwritten notes:
 - Put them in a bound journal.
 - Number and date both the notebook and pages because doing so will 
help in recall.
 - Leave the first few pages blank to facilitate the later creation of a 
map 
of content.
 Unlike a traditional table of contents, the map of content is 
designed to both highlight where specific content can be found (e.g., 
"Learning Project 1 on improving structure in therapy; see pages, 4, 32, 
and 33") and also facilitate making connections between sections within 
and between notebooks.
 - Use sticky "flag tabs" to highlight themes (e.g., green for key learnings, 
yellow for points requiring further consideration, blue for interesting 
but less useful ideas and insights).
* If you choose to use an electronic medium:
 - It should be easy to use. Bells and whistles are less important than 
accessibility and simplicity.
 - It should be easy to search, retrieve, and, most important, create links 
between notes. Certain apps (e.g., Notion, Roam Research, Obsidian) 
Identifying and Refining Your Individualized Learning Objective
 39
allow for linking one note to another as well as using links to reference 
and connect themes within the notes (i.e., bidirectional. For instructions 
on the use of Obsidian to link your notes, see https://darylchow.com/
frontiers/rightforyou/).
 - Use tags, labeling each note to create relationships amid the content 
(e.g., #empathy, #dropout, #couplestherapy). Of course, storing the notes 
in themed folders can also help to organize content.
* For the purposes of your learning project, consider keeping a record of the 
following:
 - Each week, recall the people you worked with, recording one mistake and 
one success. Limit each entry to 140 characters to ensure consistency and 
efficiency (see https://darylchow.com/frontiers/weeklytherapylearnings/ 
for an example).
 - Note thoughts, reflections, and summaries of readings, movies, books, 
and podcasts you have encountered, whether or not they seem relevant 
to your current learning project.
 - Record client feedback. Although you likely record this in your case notes, 
keeping a record in a central location will help in making connections 
between the various sources of information related to your learning 
project.
Part 2.
 After creating and starting a note-taking system, the next step is 
engaging in what experts in the learning sciences call 
retrieval practice
 (Agarwal 
& Bain, 2019). In practical terms, this means revisiting your notes on a routine 
basis, first looking at the heading or tags and trying to recall the specifics, and 
then refreshing your memory by reading the entire entry. Turns out that 
"testing yourself to learn" as opposed to "teaching to the test" is a powerful 
way of deepening your knowledge and understanding. Researchers believe it 
disrupts the false sense of fluency that can develop when details and nuance 
are forgotten in the learning process (Bjork, 2011). As you do so, resist early 
temptations to come to a conclusion, instead allowing the information to 
percolate in the hopes of making "higher order units, or 'chunks,' for con-
ceiving, understanding, and organizing" (Miller et al., 2020, p. 27).
JANICE AND THE GIANT OUTCOME GOAL
As an example of applying the preceding exercises, consider Janice, a therapist 
with about 7 years of clinical experience who worked in both inpatient and 
outpatient mental health clinics. Once she had enough cases for a reliable, 
evidence-based analysis of her clinical performance, she took up Exercise 3 
(i.e., specifying the outcome goal). In an effort to identify the outcome goal 
with the most leverage on improving her results, she created a spreadsheet 
listing each client's data (i.e., outcome and relationship scores) and other 
details. In a separate column, a distinction was drawn between those she treated 
40 
Chow, Miller, and Hubble
successfully (reliable improvement) and unsuccessfully (lack of reliable change, 
deteriorated, or dropped out after the first session). Next, with the spreadsheet 
open on her computer, she started reviewing the progress notes of her closed 
cases, "sorting for patterns."
Four were immediately apparent. First, many of the clients Janice treated 
unsuccessfully were originally seen in an inpatient context. Second, client 
progress and the quality of the relationship as measured by the Session Rating 
Scale (SRS) covaried. Specifically, SRS scores generally improved over time 
for those in the successful group while remaining stable (whether beginning 
high or low) among the unsuccessful. Third, no difference in initial SRS scores 
was found between clients who made progress over the course of care and 
dropped out, deteriorated, or did not improve. Janice knew this was a potential 
target for DP, given evidence showing lower initial relationship ratings are 
associated with better results at the end of treatment (Miller et al., 2020). 
Fourth and finally, the modal number of sessions Janice had with clients was 1, 
with 32% attending only a single visit.
As a professional whose identity was closely tied to her commitment to 
excellence, Janice's performance data evoked both anxiety and a strong sense 
of inadequacy. On the recommendation of her supervisor/coach, she chose  
to spend the next month engaging in Exercise 2 (i.e., recovering your "uni-
versity days" mindset). While she was typically focused on achievement and 
performance, she worked at being open to growth instead of just competence 
(Chow, 2019b). Although the change in mindset did not come easily, spending 
time with her performance data was what did the trick. She marveled at how 
the routine administration of simple measures could reveal patterns that had, 
despite her best intentions, eluded detection.
Eager to begin actively taking steps to address the problems identified, she 
returned to Exercise 3, determined to choose a single, committed outcome goal 
on which to work. Once again, Janice found herself struggling. Turns out, 
consultation with her supervisor/coach revealed the issue. It is a common one: 
focusing on the "how" before being clear about and committed to the "what." 
For example, given the various patterns her SRS data revealed, she decided to 
work on developing skills related to eliciting more detailed, critical feedback 
(TDPA Dimension 1A). She further concluded that adding more organization 
and focus to her sessions (TDPA Dimension 1J) would improve results with 
clients she initially met in an inpatient setting and treated for longer periods.
Returning to her spreadsheet to revisit the patterns and choose a single, 
committed outcome proved to be the solution. After recording the four patterns 
in her journal, Janice spent a week thinking about the clients with whom she 
had been unsuccessful, reviewing the case notes for each:
* Clients starting in an inpatient context (
~
65%) routinely failed to follow 
through with scheduled outpatient appointments.
* Clients whose SRS scores did not improve over the course of care were 
significantly more likely to end treatment with little or no improvement in 
Outcome Rating Scale scores.
Identifying and Refining Your Individualized Learning Objective
 41
* Clients with high initial SRS scores were equally likely to end treatment 
unsuccessfully as successfully.
* Nearly a third of Janice's clients did not return following their first session.
With help from her supervisor/coach, Janice chose what she believed would 
be the easiest to address. In this instance, that "low-hanging fruit" was the 
high number of unplanned terminations by clients first seen in an inpatient 
setting. Stated specifically, her outcome goal was to reduce dropouts for clients 
transitioning from inpatient to outpatient from 65% to 40%. The remaining 
three performance concerns were labeled "aspirational" and set aside for 
possible DP in the future.
Exercise 4 came next--figuring out the process goal that would decrease the 
dropout rate of inpatient clients. After watching video recordings of several 
representative sessions together with her supervisor/coach, both agreed the 
conversations conducted with hospitalized clients were more unfocused 
than typical outpatient visits. Consistent with Janice's lower rating on TDPA 
Dimension 3Ai (3/10), this led to the formulation of a process goal and learning 
project organized around establishing and checking goal consensus in first 
and later sessions. However, when Janice subsequently interviewed several 
former clients, a different angle emerged. A number mentioned being surprised 
by her questions about and characterization of not continuing with sessions 
on an outpatient basis as "dropping out."
Discussing her findings with her supervisor/coach, the two agreed hope 
and expectancy factors were implicated, one element of which (TDPA Dimen-
sion 2A & D regarding role induction, setting and monitoring client expectations, 
and adapting the treatment rationale to foster engagement and hope) Janice 
had also rated low (3/10) on her initial completion of the tool.
Janice immediately went to work creating a learning project, taking time 
to brainstorm, talk with colleagues, and research ideas related to operational-
izing her process goal. Because she found clients frequently struggled to parlay 
improvements made while in the hospital to their lives following discharge, 
she created what she later termed her "safety-net" system. Introduced early 
in care, it emphasized the critical role she would play and resources she 
could bring to bear in supporting lasting change for the client. Appointment 
reminders and help with arranging transportation to and from sessions were 
two among the many aspects of the system specifically designed to reduce 
dropouts.
Together with her supervisor/coach, Janice continued to monitor her 
performance data as she put her plans into action. Six months later, she was 
disappointed when improvement in the percentage of clients failing to follow 
through with posthospitalization outpatient sessions stalled at 50%. At one 
point, she began actively considering replacing her committed outcome goals 
with one of her remaining (three) aspirational goals. "Actually," she said, 
"nearly all of the items on the TDPA are things I could work on and do better 
at. How can I 
not
 try to improve on more of these?"
42 
Chow, Miller, and Hubble
Completing the "antigoal" exercise (5) persuaded Janice to maintain her 
current objective but reconsider her process goal. Addressing TDPA Factor 2 
(hopes, expectations, and role) had resulted in a decline in dropouts, but she 
was looking for more. Returning to recordings of her sessions and consulting 
the therapy blueprint she had created at the outset of her foray into DP,  
she noted the significant amount of time spent in initial visits conducting a 
thorough psychosocial history. It was an activity that had been ingrained in 
her clinical routine from her university days--and yet, she realized, the infor-
mation gathered only rarely informed her work, delayed actively intervening 
to help clients, and often resulted in lower levels of engagement.
At this time, she ran across the book 
The First Kiss
 (Chow, 2018), which 
focused on the importance of the initial therapeutic encounters. In place of 
"taking" (paperwork, information gathering, long diagnostic workups), it encour-
aged therapists "giving" to clients, taking full advantage of the change research 
shows occurs early in treatment (Lutz et al., 2009, 2014). The same body of 
evidence reviewed in the book showed traditional "intake" practices resulted 
in higher dropout rates, slower progress, and more expensive care. It also iden-
tified an alternative: 
resource activation
 (Gassmann & Grawe, 2006). Instead of 
asking about the presenting problem, symptoms, and struggles, it involves 
actively soliciting information about client capabilities, motivations, and existing 
social support network.
At this point, Janice made a conscious choice to change her process goal 
from Items A and D on Dimension 2 (relationship factors) of the TDPA to 
Dimension 4 (client factors), specifically, Item D, "incorporating your client's 
strengths, abilities, and resources into care." In support of this new objective, 
she sought out research, training materials, and consultation. After several 
months, Janice's hard work began to pay off. Interestingly, her discontinuation 
rates among those clients beginning care in an inpatient setting declined (from 
50% to 18%), and the modal number of sessions she met with clients tripled 
(from 1 to 3). As often happens, such improvements influenced other perfor-
mance metrics, including a rise in Janice's overall effectiveness (i.e., effect size).
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
Our empathic disposition primes us to zoom in on one person rather than 
many. In so doing, developmental psychologist Paul Bloom (2016) argued, 
we become biased by the spotlight effect, missing bigger patterns, the so-called 
forest for the trees. The purpose of this chapter has been to marry our empathic 
ability with the systematic approach needed for successful DP. Whatever one's 
primary disposition, the process is hard work. Some suggestions born of 
experience follow:
* Unless your data indicate deficits in the structural domain of the TDPA, 
limiting your process goals and learning project to mastering a specific theo-
retical orientation is a mistake. Instead of aiming at "doing things right," 
Identifying and Refining Your Individualized Learning Objective
 43
focus on finding the "right thing" to improve your results. In other words, 
keep your eyes on the outcome goal.
* If the TDPA and OPL framework took you an hour or so to complete, it prob-
ably isn't going to serve you well. More time--much more time--is required.
* If your process goal feels easy, it's unlikely to stretch you sufficiently to 
improve your performance.
* If you are struggling with your process goal and learning project, your 
outcome goal may be too vaguely defined or ambitious.
* If your outcome goal is proving too difficult to achieve, designate it as 
"aspirational" and move on.
* If you find yourself losing track of what you were working on, consider 
reviewing your journal (i.e., notes) more often and making your learning 
project more visible.
* If your learning project and process goal are not leading to improvement 
in your outcome goal, consider the following:
 - whether your process goal is clearly linked to your outcome goal
 - allowing more time to pass before assessing results
 - whether adequate effort has been devoted to your process goal and 
learning project
 - consulting a coach
* Keep in mind that outcome goals do not always equate with improving or 
learning therapy skills. A high "no-show" rate, for example, might best be 
addressed by adopting an automated email or message reminder system 
rather than new engagement techniques or abilities (Martin et al., 2015).
DECISION POINT
What to do next:
*  If you have completed the TDPA and OPL framework and need guidance 
developing an exercise for your specific objective, turn to
- Chapter 3 for client factors
- Chapter 4 for therapist factors
- Chapter 5 for relationship factors
- Chapter 6 for hope and expectancy factors
- Chapter 7 for structure
*  If you have used the TDPA to establish a specific, individualized learning 
objective but are struggling to stay focused or motivated, turn to Chapter 8.
44 
Chow, Miller, and Hubble
