34

NAVIGATING OUR WORK 

ENVIRONMENT
Zora, now a midcareer marriage and family therapist, once worked for a
large group practice employing 32 clinicians. The clinic housed a variety
of psychotherapists, including psychologists, social workers, marriage and
family therapists, and licensed professional counselors, as well as a handful
of psychiatrists, psychiatric nurse practitioners, and a neuropsychologist. Four
full-time administrative staff managed scheduling, initial client inquiries,
billing, and insurance reimbursements.
The director of the clinic, an older male clinical psychologist with an MBA,
also saw a several clients each week. He had a reputation for running a
“tight ship” and liked to keep the clinic bustling. As such, the waiting room
was always full, clinicians and staff were always moving up and down
hallways and in and out of offices, and required meetings were plentiful. 
Clinicians were also expected to "meet their numbers," as it was unaffec-
tionately referred to during meetings. When therapists dipped below their 
quota for 2 weeks in a row, they were supposed to meet with the group 
practice director to bump their numbers back up.
How did you feel reading this description? Were the atmospheric condi-
tions and productivity expectations familiar to you? Were you a bit over-
whelmed, or perhaps you perceived this clinic as fairly normal and even as 
desirable? Whether obviously or covertly, we are tasked with navigating the 
challenges of our workplace culture and structure, relationship dynamics, 
caseload burdens and freedoms, and the opportunities for supporting self-care, 
growth, and diversity of professional experience.
WORKPLACE CULTURE
What is the general atmosphere in your workplace? Does it feel mostly 
welcoming and supportive, overly controlling and demanding, or perhaps 
laissez-faire? Is it relatively even keeled and predictable or on the mercurial  
end of the spectrum? What about a healthy synergy of productivity with 
a relaxed flexibility, seriousness mixed with elements of fun, humor, and 
enjoyment? Are professional autonomy and creativity encouraged in mean-
ingful ways, or are these qualities subtly or overtly discouraged? Given that 
control and autonomy are such important resources for work-related out-
comes (e.g., Rupert et al., 2009) as well as for reducing work-to-home con-
flicts (Rupert et al., 2012), a workplace culture that grants some degree of 
flexibility and decision making is likely quite beneficial for therapists' overall 
well-being.
Work environments are systems like any other. An entirely closed system 
doesn't welcome feedback or agency of its employees, whereas a completely 
open system may feel chaotic. How would you assess your current workplace 
for its openness of communication and feedback loops? Being left to your 
own devices to assess how and what you're doing can be quite a strain on 
job satisfaction and thus overall well-being. Openness of communication also 
includes a spirit of teamwork and camaraderie rather than an atmosphere of 
every colleague for themself (even if subtly encouraged). Feeling bound by 
common purpose, common stresses, and communal support is often a tacit 
but incredibly powerful source of professional well-being.
A supportive culture is one that fosters good communication among its 
employees. In fact, anxiety can be lessened and motivation enhanced when 
Navigating Our Work Environment * 
393
employees of any organization are part of a workplace culture that values and 
acts on clear, direct, and consistent communication (American Psychological 
Association, 2011). Being duly informed about your workplace policies, 
expectations, and activities and having a sense of ownership and responsi-
bility over your professional future can facilitate more effective coping with the 
stresses and demands of the job. In effect, as your sense of agency increases, 
your risk of burnout decreases. Research on burnout supports this idea, as 
several studies show that greater sense of control is related to lower levels of 
emotional exhaustion and depersonalization and a higher sense of personal 
accomplishment (e.g., Ackerley et al., 1988; J. Lee et al., 2011).
Sharing in the values, beliefs, assumptions, and guiding principles that, in 
part, contribute to your workplace culture may also indicate how well you're 
resonating in that atmosphere. Some of us may like our specific job but find 
ourselves at odds with how the particular clinical setting treats its clients or 
the therapeutic approaches it readily advocates using. This element can make 
a significant difference for how accepted you feel and how eager you are to 
return to work each day.
Threats of aggression and violence in clinical settings can significantly 
affect a therapist's basic sense of safety, although some psychotherapists are 
affected more than others. How your workplace views such potentials and 
handles the actual incidents matters a great deal. A colleague who worked 
for years on an adolescent inpatient psychiatric unit at large urban hospital  
was confronted many times with threats, aggression, and violence from various 
patients. How quickly and effectively this colleague was assisted by fellow 
staff was at times likely a matter of serious injury or worse. And the extent 
to which she received adequate debriefing and support was subsequently a 
matter of her well-being and mitigation of posttraumatic stress symptom-
atology. What is your workplace policy and support around such incidents, 
both for acute crises and as prevention? Ultimately, do you feel safe in your 
own office or in the facility in which you work?
For those of us who are private practitioners, evaluation of the culture 
and atmosphere of the practice setting might seem a bit strange. Consider how 
welcoming or warm you are to yourself. Have you established fair policies, 
reliable and easily implemented protocols, and predictable systems of com-
munication for yourself that keep your practice humming smoothly? Do you 
feel safe in your space, and do you have ways to protect against potential 
aggressive acts from clients? As discussed in this chapter, being both your 
own boss and employee lowers risk of burnout in so many ways but can also 
increase feelings of isolation and lack of support.
394
 * The Thriving Therapist
INTERPERSONAL WORK DYNAMICS
When it comes to how we evaluate the stresses and supports of our job, 
how often are we thinking of people 
other
 than our clients? Bosses, super-
visors, fellow psychotherapists, other allied professionals, office or clinic 
staff, and even referral sources and outside professional collaborators are 
the people with whom you relate within your work environment. Workplace 
leadership (e.g., owner, director, supervisor) tends to set the tone for the work 
environment--whether through overt actions or through personal qualities--
even if much of their influence is behind the scenes.
How you perceive your boss also matters. Do you feel valued, even if you 
don't have a lot of direct contact? When you have problems or need extra  
support, is your boss available to listen, validate, and problem solve? Perhaps 
you get a lot of lip service, but changes you feel need to happen never actually 
happen. If the roles are reversed and you are in charge of a number of other 
therapists, it's quite useful to reflect on the degree of fairness, enjoyment, 
validation, humility, and openness that you embody and express. Bosses 
are not superhuman and more effectively lead from a place of courageous 
vulnerability (Brown, 2018). However, given the differential power they hold, 
it's very important for that influence to be aligned with the larger mission of 
the workplace setting and be adequately supportive of the psychotherapists 
who serve that mission on a daily basis.
A number of tips and strategies are available for negotiating profes-
sional relationships, and they are especially useful if you go to work each day 
anticipating and avoiding interactions with a "difficult" boss or supervisor.  
According to many experts in the field of occupational wellness, it's wise 
to ascertain if difficult behaviors from leadership are situational and/or 
malleable or if they reflect a deeper and more consistent pattern of personality 
structure that is responsible for troubling or stress-inducing actions (e.g., Puder- 
York, 2005). Sometimes bosses are flagrantly narcissistic, overly demanding, 
neglectfully oblivious, or even downright abusive. In any of these cases (and 
of course with other variations on this theme), therapists can first seek counsel 
with and validation from trusted colleagues, colleague assistance programs, 
union reps if applicable, human resources if potentially helpful, and friends 
and family.
Peer and collegial dynamics in the workplace can be a source of both occu-
pational support and stress, even at times from within the same relationship. 
Fortunately, social support specifically from coworkers has been found to be 
effective at reducing burnout (McCormack et al., 2015). With greater support 
comes less emotional exhaustion and depersonalization and more of a sense 
Navigating Our Work Environment * 
395
of personal accomplishment (Ben-Zur & Michael, 2007; Rupert et al., 2015). 
What only our colleagues can truly understand and appreciate may provide 
us with the most meaningful support. In fact, workplace support has been 
shown to be the only positive resource associated with therapist's sense of 
personal accomplishment (J. Lee et al., 2011).
A great example of the process and benefits of coworker support is found 
within an inpatient hospital setting. I once heard of a highly creative and 
morale-boosting therapist who would conduct mini video interviews with their 
coworkers about what they were grateful for and what inspired them about 
their jobs. This type of interview was not intended to ignore the stresses and 
strains of the highly challenging jobs everyone performed each day. Rather, 
this form of support highlighted in part why we entered these jobs in the 
first place and how we can all find rewards and joys even amid the struggle.  
Not surprisingly, morale, sympathetic joy, and inspiration were boosted 
among the coworkers and even within the therapist who was spreading the 
good feelings.
Let's come back to those in private practice for a moment. Such therapists 
may simply not have any colleagues from whom to seek support, for whom 
to provide assistance, and with whom they can participate in a wonderful 
workplace satisfaction-enhancing practice. Not surprisingly, research shows 
that solo practitioners indeed have lower levels of workplace social support 
(Rupert & Kent, 2007). As McCormack and colleagues (2018) considered, 
however, it may be interesting to reflect on how the support that private 
practitioners' both need and perceive may be dependent on their experience, 
work setting, and level of training. On average, we know that burnout risk 
decreases with age and/or career stage (e.g., Scaletta, 2021), and so maturity 
and experience may be protective factors for people who are relatively isolated 
within a solo psychotherapy practice.
I recall the feeling of isolation and stark lack of support when I moved 
from a thriving research and clinical center in the downtown Boston area to 
subletting two different office spaces for a year. I interacted with very few 
other professionals during that year. When I made the move to rent my own  
office space, which was a gift in many ways, I quickly experienced the 
noninteractive, noncollegial tenor of the small house of only nine other inde-
pendent practitioners of varying sorts, including an attorney and a small 
nonprofit agency. On the basement level with only one other clinician's 
office and a waiting room big enough for 1.5 chairs, I occasionally passed by 
my "colleagues" on the way to the bathroom like ships in the night. This work-
place environment certainly didn't help my case for holistically supporting 
my well-being at the outset of my career as a psychotherapist.
396
 * The Thriving Therapist
The transition to renting an office within a three-person independent group 
practice held much more promise for the perception of support, if not the 
full-on experience of it. I immediately felt a fellowship with the other clini-
cians even if they were fully established amongst themselves. We have shared 
some cases, made reciprocal referrals, and maintain a friendly supportive 
spirit. Although I'm more introverted and a highly sensitive person, this 
social upgrade seemed to make a world of difference for my mental and 
emotional health.
What are the strengths and challenges right now of your collegial relation-
ships? What is the general tone of your interactions with your peers? Do you 
have the opportunity to talk, meet, or have lunch with your colleagues, or 
is everyone moving through their day independently with their head down? 
What is the quality of your relationships and pattern of interactions with your 
colleagues? Does anything need to change on your end? Perhaps you realize 
that you feel both uplifted and grounded when you see some colleagues more 
than others. Can you consciously make these interactions more plentiful? 
Similarly, skillful lessening of your investment in draining interactions can 
lighten the load and save your precious energy for strengthening other rela-
tionships of deeper value and meaning.
What do we do when our colleagues are difficult to work with? Dr. Glenn 
Rolfsen, a Norwegian clinical psychologist and specialist in occupational 
well-being, addressed a very insidious and toxic dynamic bordering on bully-
ing that he highlighted as "backbiting" (Rolfsen, 2016). When colleagues 
essentially gossip and complain about their coworkers behind their backs, 
a subtly tense and damaging atmosphere is created and often unknowingly 
perpetuated. The "talked about" coworkers may be treated differently, with 
increased bias and disrespect, while the backbiting individual(s) now may 
feel justified in the gossip and may spread more harmful untruths about 
their colleagues.
Lest we lament that nothing can be done about such a toxic interpersonal 
culture, Rolfsen (2016) offered some hope. In his work as psychotherapist, 
corporate counselor, and leadership consultant, he has helped transform 
this type of atmosphere in hundreds of companies. Through larger company 
meetings, employees are asked three basic questions to harness the spirit of 
group-level change. In the triple-filter test, we can ask ourselves (or trusted 
supervisors or peers can ask us), regarding communication 
about
 others, is it 
true, it is good, and is it useful? If you answered "not really" to one or more 
of these questions, you might need to reconsider sharing information about 
a colleague with another colleague.
Rolfsen (2016) advised that the group be asked a simple question: "Would 
you like to work in a place where there is no backbiting?" From there, workers 
Navigating Our Work Environment * 
397
then agree, through formally signing a document, to join this new initiative  
to keep the workplace free from backbiting, with reminders posted in various 
locations and weekly check-ins for several months about how the project 
is going. This type of mini-intervention, Dr. Rolfsen reported, will result in 
the reduction of absenteeism, minimization of interpersonal tensions, and 
increases in productivity.
The complexities and uniqueness of each therapist's workplace environ-
ment call for a flexible, resilience-building framework to support well-being 
in a sustainable manner. In her RESET approach, Dr. Kristen Lee (2014)--
behavioral science and resilience expert--suggested that we first consider 
our primary appraisal of and reactivity to a given situation before making any 
decisions. In other words, trying to make reasonable decisions when emo-
tions are running hot often backfires. With a more 
wise mind
 online, we can 
appraise a situation from multiple perspectives and draw on the resources 
we already have available to us. We could reach out to colleagues, mentors, 
and friends outside of our workplace. Fresh takes on a long-standing problem 
can often be exactly what is needed in these situations.
WORKPLACE STRUCTURES
Whether you work for someone else or for yourself, you know the value of 
well-oiled operations and internal structures of your workplace. The admin-
istrative duties you're responsible for and supported on are likely more 
tangible and trackable than your workplace culture and atmosphere, and 
they matter a great deal. How user-friendly and consistently operational 
your electronic health records system is can make all the difference for daily 
frustration levels and feelings of satisfaction in your workplace. The volume 
and manageability of your paperwork and the requirements related to diagnos-
ing for billing can also press on therapists with significant weight. A very large 
survey of practicing psychologists revealed that 68% endorsed paperwork as 
a primary stressor in their professional lives (Sherman & Thelen, 1998), and 
burnout risk not surprisingly increases when practitioners work more and log 
more administrative paperwork hours (e.g., Rupert et al., 2015). It's probably 
fair to say that no psychotherapist got into this helping profession to write 
progress notes and manage billing and insurance complexities.
How we manage ourselves with these administrative tasks is a contin-
uous act of self-caring. Despite disliking and sometimes being overwhelmed 
by our paperwork, it is a necessary evil that we all must face and make the 
best of. How does your workplace build in supports for you in this endeavor? 
398
 * The Thriving Therapist
How do you typically handle your workplace guidelines and policies for the 
administrative duties for which you're responsible? Influenced by many factors 
including your work style, conscientiousness, perfectionism, and executive 
functioning, addressing your paperwork and other important administrative 
tasks may feel like such a burden that you avoid it at all costs or attempt it 
diligently but can't seem to get a hold of it. The accumulation of your prog-
ress notes and other tasks may quietly but powerfully follow you around and 
into your home after work is officially over for the day.
Divining for yourself (or with the help of trusted colleagues or your work-
place leadership) how to reduce the negative impact of your administrative 
responsibilities can be an incredible gift of sustainable self-caring. Interest-
ingly, some of my colleagues and I became significantly more proficient 
and efficient in note writing during the pandemic because there was no real 
divide between looking at the computer screen to see a client and viewing  
your computer- or cloud-housed records for that client at the same time. 
Doing your best to make sure your sessions end on time allows for the extra 
few minutes to write an efficient note. If note writing during or immediately 
after a clinical encounter is unworkable for you for personal or workplace 
reasons, making sure you set aside your own administrative task time during 
your day is essential to mitigate burnout risk. Talking with colleagues about 
their best methods for the most efficient note writing or other administrative  
tasks can save you a great deal of unnecessary stress and can help make your 
work experience more of what it was designed for--helping others and being 
the best clinician you can be.
Although tele-mental health services have been increasing exponentially 
in the last several years, the COVID-19 pandemic brought telehealth into 
great relief in a dramatic and immediate fashion. Almost every if not all 
psychotherapists (at least temporarily) abandoned their physical offices for 
virtual workplaces. How well private practices, clinics, agencies, schools, and 
treatment facilities managed this necessary transition was an obvious source 
of stress and/or support for many. We all were required to adjust and accom-
modate, and how open and flexible your workplace was might have made a 
significant difference for your well-being during this highly challenging time.
Prior to and well after the pandemic, however, is the general notion that 
workplace operations should, when running smoothly, be out of our conscious 
awareness to a large degree and serve not only to prevent extra workplace 
stress and demand but also to enhance our degree of work satisfaction. 
Workplace operations that ideally would run effectively behind the scenes 
include reliable high-speed internet (for regular and telehealth uses), user-
friendly fax or secure e-transmission mechanisms, email, security and privacy 
Navigating Our Work Environment * 
399
measures, hassle-free booking and scheduling systems, accessible and up-to-
date documentation and forms, and billing and insurance interfaces or helpful 
staff management of such administrative nightmares.
Although private practitioners are often executing many or all of these tasks 
themselves, it behooves us to evaluate how well our workplace and business 
systems are operating. In what ways would you fix or enhance the current 
workplace structures and operations so that your business runs smoothly and 
you can focus on doing psychotherapy rather than struggling with internet  
connectivity issues or billing hassles, for example? Reliable cloud-based prac-
tice management software can be a relatively inexpensive way to help cover 
many of these areas. Another fundamental self-caring act as a private practi-
tioner is using a separate business phone line. I've met too many practitioners 
who have one phone number for both their personal cell and their work lines. 
This set-up can cause boundary confusion for both therapist and client and 
may accidentally lead to work-personal life spillover. Free services like Google 
Voice can be accessed directly from your smartphone, and VoIP services that 
may offer additional functionality and features require a high-speed internet 
connection.
We can also gain so much wisdom and practical guidance through dedi-
cated therapy practice forums on social media, free or low-cost offerings 
from practice management software companies like SimplePractice, state 
and provincial associations and colleague assistance programs, and small 
but highly influential entrepreneurial endeavors like Person Centered Tech 
(which marries psychotherapy practice with technology and security), The 
Private Practice Startup, Practice Academy, and TherapyDen.
CASELOAD BURDENS AND FREEDOMS
At the intersection of workplace culture, interpersonal dynamics, and struc-
ture is a psychotherapist's caseload. Classical burnout theory suggests that 
high demand, low control, and depleted resources all contribute to risk of 
burnout. As such, when you consider your caseload, you're also reflecting on 
how much control you have over the volume, type, and variety of clients you 
see. How demanding is your caseload overall? Do 20% of your clients take 
up 80% of your energy and time, like the rule somehow seems to play out 
so reliably? Are your personal and social resources and competence levels 
sufficient for the caseload you manage?
Even if we are in private practice, we might feel that we have little 
control over who we see. Intersecting with savvy marketing, a good business 
400
 * The Thriving Therapist
model, and our unique financial situation is the influence we feel we have 
over which clients to take and which ones to decline or refer. At the outset 
of establishing her private practice many years ago, a colleague took all 
prospective clients who called her, and she charged whatever they said they 
could afford. After a while, not surprisingly, this caseload and fee structure 
wore on this therapist. Shortly after recognizing that this way of practicing 
was unsustainable for both her business and her mental health, this colleague 
became more selective and increased her fees, thus significantly contribut-
ing to her overall work satisfaction. If you work in an environment whose 
culture is oriented strictly to the "bottom line" despite its mission to serve 
others, you'll likely feel this tension quite acutely. Does your boss or super-
visor (subtly or overtly) levy demands that you meet your direct contacts 
quota each week even if you've expressed how stressed or overwhelmed you 
might be? We know that number of hours worked, regardless of workplace 
setting, translates into higher burnout risk (e.g., Rupert et al., 2015).
The question then becomes how open and flexible are the systems within 
which we work. Does your work culture allow for open and honest commu-
nication about your workload and risk of occupational hazards, and would 
your director truly listen to your experience and needs? There are many great 
examples of group practices that place as much value as possible on the 
professional autonomy of their employees while still forging an atmosphere 
of community and mutual support. These guiding principles then extend 
not only to caseload decisions but also to employees' internal conflicts and 
to other workplace dynamics that require fairness and swift resolution.
Negotiation, whether with yourself in private practice or with a superior, 
is a necessary task and a skill worthy of cultivating. If 60% of your caseload 
is moderately to severely depressed middle-aged White men, perhaps you 
would benefit from some kind of caseload diversity before a degree of 
cynicism sets in and your effectiveness with this population wanes. How open 
is your workplace to accommodating your particular needs? Are you simply 
required to take whoever walks through the door? If you're a therapist in a 
residential treatment facility or on inpatient psychiatric unit, for example, 
you would by default have much less control than would a therapist in a 
large group practice or in business for themself. Trauma therapists and prac-
titioners of dialectical behavior therapy, for example, may be at high risk 
for secondary traumatic stress and vicarious traumatization by virtue of the 
nature of their caseloads as well as the particular material and affect that 
are presented to them on an hourly basis. In these cases especially, develop-
ment of fine-tuned coping and reliance on trusted peer and supervisory sup-
ports become quite essential self-caring enactments. Ideally, your workplace 
Navigating Our Work Environment * 
401
would account for such occupational risks and hazards in part through flexible 
caseload management and through carrying each therapist's well-being in 
mind and heart.
We can consider Zora once again; she had quite strict "numbers" goals to 
reach each week. Although Zora tried to negotiate the sheer volume of clients 
in her caseload and the quota she was required to meet, she was essentially 
told to keep at it. This lack of flexibility eventually contributed to Zora's decid-
ing to leave that group practice for another setting altogether. That option 
is 
almost
 always there for us, even if it feels like it isn't. After careful consul-
tation with trusted colleagues, friends in the know, and colleague assistance 
associations available to you, you may end up deciding to move on to save 
your sanity and get a taste for what another environment could offer.
WORKPLACE SUPPORT FOR WELLNESS, DIVERSITY OF 
PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE, AND THRIVING
Dr. Jeff Santee--clinical psychologist, Diplomate of comprehensive energy 
psychology, and co-owner of Summit Clinical Services outside of Chicago, 
Illinois--is no stranger to managing the joys and complexities of running 
a medium-sized group psychotherapy practice. With an initial vision to be 
multidisciplinary and comprehensive, Dr. Santee helped create a full-service 
and administrative staff-supported group practice that was designed to pro-
vide for maximum professional autonomy for its clinicians. Clinicians can  
choose either part- or full-time employment, and each clinician is given a 
voice on at least one practice or operations committee for more enhanced 
engagement and decision making. The practice has an active blog that clini-
cians can contribute to, thus enhancing clinicians' diversity of professional 
engagement and potential job satisfaction.
Although his colleagues were initially unfamiliar with energy psychology, 
Dr. Santee noted that he felt supported in openly integrating these methods 
into his practice (rather than keeping this aspect of his professional life a 
secret; J. Santee, personal communication, January 2021). Given that some 
of us may struggle to find coverage during our precious time off, Dr. Santee 
feels fortunate that he can take vacations with the peace of mind that he 
(and his clients) are adequately covered by his colleagues while he's away.
Summit Clinical Services is just one example of a workplace that values 
some of the central themes of this book. Although we're exploring 
self
-care,  
we're also speaking about being seen and feeling whole within our psycho-
therapeutic community. Having opportunities to grow and contribute in unique 
402
 * The Thriving Therapist
ways while still maintaining a sense of connection to a larger whole is ulti-
mately supportive of one's own caring and well-being over time. No one likes 
to feel like a cog in a machine. Psychotherapists, doing some of the most 
challenging and human-oriented work in existence today, are no exception.
Not every therapist is only a therapist. Some of us enjoy research and writ-
ing, community outreach and pro bono work, workshopping, and teaching, 
to name a few forms of professionally diverse experience. Are these types of 
experiences readily available within the scope of your employment, or would 
you have to manage these endeavors on your own time? If you're a private 
practitioner, carving out the time for endeavors that inspire, motivate, and 
expand your professional self becomes an area of negotiation with yourself. 
Not putting all your eggs of talent and skill in one professional basket can 
allow us to feel more whole, revitalize the soul, and spread any stress across 
activities rather than accumulated within one role.
Not all supplemental or even complementary professional activities can 
be accommodated within a given workplace, but some models for this type of 
employment have caught the eye of the American Psychological Association 
(Chamberlin, 2017). Around the country some group practices subscribe to a 
more scientist-practitioner model (LeJeune & Luoma, 2015). Alvord Baker & 
Associates (in Maryland) and Portland Psychotherapy Clinic, Research, and 
Training Center (in Oregon) are two standout examples showing how research 
is built into the group practice model, with in-house research directors and 
assistants to support a variety of research projects more fully. Psychotherapists 
who have trained as researchers and have long-standing interests in pursuing 
some measure of a research career would likely find these hybrid roles quite 
appealing.
Research, however, isn't the only facet of a clinician's experience that a 
workplace can value, support, and encourage. Creativity, flexibility, com-
munity involvement, professional development, and in-house mentorship 
are all examples of how some group practices make the workplace highly 
inviting and rewarding. Some group practices, like Southeast Psych in North 
Carolina and Tennessee, embrace therapists' complementary skill sets. For 
example, one therapist who was a certified yoga instructor was able to expand 
her office space and practice model to accommodate large yoga sessions 
for mental health support. Other practices, like IntraSpectrum Counseling 
in Chicago, recognize staff's basic needs by keeping the communal pantry 
stocked with food and drink to grab between clients. Supplying quick and 
easy nourishment can seem so basic as to accidentally ignore, but I can attest 
firsthand to the incredible effect that my office suite's coffee maker has had 
on my well-being over the years.
Navigating Our Work Environment * 
403
Professional development is both a necessary and often desired element 
of any psychotherapist's job and journey, but when continuing education 
(CE) opportunities are always left to the individual therapist, they can feel 
a bit isolating and frustrating. And when CE courses or books are boring, 
professional development can feel uninspired. Workplaces that integrate 
professional development into the job description are helping breathe life 
into a sometimes perfunctory task. Some group practices offer lunchtime talks 
for CE credit, while others have established a mentorship system for staff 
to develop their careers and discuss issues around managing both their 
professional and personal lives.
IntraSpectrum gives new meaning to workplace togetherness and  
professional-personal life integration by encouraging staff to engage in activ-
ities like bowling and cooking classes together outside of work. Southeast 
Psych has a similar approach, reserving a few hours on the last Wednesday 
of each month to incorporate play, fun food, and entertainment. As you read 
about such innovative workplaces, do you imagine that your work environ-
ment could benefit from infusion of a spirit of camaraderie and wellness? 
What would happen if you and a few colleagues experimented with such 
themes and then proposed these ideas to leadership? If you're a director or 
owner of a group practice, clinic, or agency, do you think there's room for 
more enjoyment, creativity, and togetherness in your workplace? How could 
you incorporate even a little of this fun-loving spirit into your culture?
Our discussion of how workplace environments influence our ability to 
care for ourselves with relative ease wouldn't be complete without a mention 
of health care, sick leave, and vacation policies. Even if you work for yourself, 
how would you evaluate your values and policies related to keeping your-
self well and taking care of yourself when you're sick? (These, as we likely 
know, are two separate endeavors and should deserve somewhat distinct 
workplace efforts.) If you're part-time, does your place of employment offer 
benefits, or do you have to shop around and find them elsewhere, likely for 
much higher cost? How much sick time are you afforded?
In one clinic where I worked, employees had to work for a designated 
period to earn 1 day of sick leave. This type of policy is not uncommon, 
but how flexible are your workplace policies, and how guilty do you end 
up feeling for calling out sick? If you have children and need to stay home, 
how does your workplace handle this? Is this an added stressor, or do you 
feel taken care of and supported? The extra societal burden cannot be over-
stated. Sometimes all the "best" self-care in the world doesn't make up for 
a lack of external support or workplace neglect of our health and wellness. 
At the very least, we can find company in such suffering and begin to let go 
404
 * The Thriving Therapist
of any extraneous emotional burden. At the very best, we may see (or help 
bring about) changes in the ways our workplace treats its employees, for our 
and our colleagues' betterment and thriving.
Self-care is a two-way street. That is, we can certainly modify our mindset 
and actions to be our own best allies. But we must also look to the ways in 
which our workplace environments support us in this endeavor. Employees 
of massive corporations who earn minimum wage and work 60 to 70 hours 
per week just to make ends meet obviously have very little time to do any-
thing extra to tend to themselves. Thus, self-care somehow must be integrated 
into their day. Similarly, if you're expected to meet a very high quota for 
direct service hours each week, you may be hard pressed to find any pockets 
of time to slow down, breathe, eat, and do other necessary things for your 
basic wellness and well-being.
Workplace culture and practices matter. How open, flexible, and employee- 
centered the workplace is can contribute both directly and indirectly to 
employees' satisfaction and morale. But if we stay focused on cultural atmo-
sphere and interpersonal dynamics, we might miss another important source 
of therapists' wellness, that of the more physical and sensory aspects of our 
workplace environment that can easily slither under the radar but never-
theless affect our sense of comfort and well-being. In Chapter 35, we explore 
the often ignored facets of our physical atmosphere and ways that we can 
modify our work spaces for our enhanced wellness over time.
