131

Preparations for Exercise 11
1. Read the instructions in Chapter 2.
2. Download the Deliberate Practice Reaction Form and Deliberate Practice Diary Form at 
https://www.apa.org/pubs/books/deliberate-practice-dialectical-behavior-therapy  
(see the "Clinician and Practitioner Resources" tab; also available in Appendixes A  
and B, respectively).
Skill Description

Skill Difficulty Level: Advanced
One of the primary goals of dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) is to increase dialectical 
thinking and to help clients shift typically extreme emotions and behaviors to more 
balanced, effective responses. In DBT, the therapist pushes for change in the client 
while helping the client accept their emotional experience and those aspects of their 
reality that cannot be changed. One way that DBT therapists support their clients in 
this endeavor is by using dialectical strategies to balance problem-solving solutions 
that are oriented toward change with acceptance-focused solutions that are oriented 
toward helping clients tolerate reality as it is (Sayrs & Linehan, 2019). These two seem-
ingly opposing positions are balanced through the adoption of a dialectical stance (i.e., 
embraces the view that therapists can simultaneously hold the positions of accepting 
the client as they are and moving them toward change) as well as through a set of 
dialectical communication strategies. When taking a dialectical approach, validation 
and change strategies are woven together so that both are conveyed in communica-
tion with the client.
When the therapist identifies rigid or extreme thinking (i.e., nondialectical thinking), 
they highlight how both sides of an issue can be true. For example, a client may use 
Promoting Dialectical Thinking 

Through Both-And Statements

11

E X E R C I S E
132
Deliberate Practice Exercises for Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills
substances to help escape distressing flashbacks of past traumatic events. The validity 
of this behavior is that it solves the problem of ending or numbing aversive experiences. 
On the other hand, substance use creates other problems for the client that further 
exacerbate their pain and suffering. In this scenario, the therapist may use dialectical 
communication to highlight to the client that it makes sense they want to escape painful 
emotions in the moment and that they need to develop skills for effectively managing 
flashbacks to decrease pain over the long run. For this exercise, we focus on using 
"both-and" language to reframe polarizing or extreme statements or to highlight 
seemingly opposed parts of a client statement that are equally true and valid.
SKILL CRITERION FOR EXERCISE 11
1. The therapist balances use of acceptance-oriented strategies with change- 
oriented strategies through both-and statements.
Examples of Promoting Dialectical Thinking Through  

Both-And Statements

Example 1
CLIENT:
 [
Sad
] Things are just so hard right now. I'm coming to therapy, trying to make 
these big changes, but I'm struggling day to day.
THERAPIST:
 You are working really hard to get better, and it's really difficult.
Example 2
CLIENT:
 [
Frustrated
] I can't believe you're going on vacation next week. You won't be 
there for me if I need you.
THERAPIST:
 Yes, it would be better for you if I were not going away next week and it's OK 
that I'm going away next week.
Example 3
CLIENT:
 [
Ashamed
] If you understood how much pain I'm in, you wouldn't ask me to stop 
cutting. Cutting is the only relief I can get right now.
THERAPIST:
 Cutting brings you relief and it maintains your pain in the long run.
Promoting Dialectical Thinking Through Both-And Statements
133

INSTRUCTIONS FOR EXERCISE 11
Step 1: Role-Play and Feedback
* The client says the first beginner client statement. The therapist improvises a response 
based on the skill criteria.
* The trainer (or, if not available, the client) provides brief feedback based on the skill 
criteria.
* The client then repeats the same statement, and the therapist again improvises a 
response. The trainer (or client) again provides brief feedback.
Step 2: Repeat
* Repeat Step 1 for all the statements at the current difficulty level (beginner, 
intermediate, or advanced).
Step 3: Assess and Adjust Difficulty
* The therapist completes the Deliberate Practice Reaction Form (see Appendix A) and 
decides whether to make the exercise easier or harder or to repeat the same difficulty 
level.
Step 4: Repeat for Approximately 15 Minutes
* Repeat Steps 1 to 3 for at least 15 minutes.
* The trainees then switch therapist and client roles and start over.
134
Deliberate Practice Exercises for Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills
Now it's your turn! Follow Steps 1 and 2 from the instructions.
Remember:
 The goal of the role-play is for trainees to practice improvising responses 
to the client statements in a manner that (a) uses the skill criteria and (b) feels authentic 
for the trainee. 
Example therapist responses for each client statement are provided 

at the end of this exercise.

Trainees should attempt to improvise their own responses 

before reading the example responses.

BEGINNER-LEVEL CLIENT STATEMENTS FOR EXERCISE 11

Beginner Client Statement 1

[Sad]
 I'm so confused. I want this relationship to work so badly, but things between me and 
my partner are so difficult right now. Every time we're around each other, we get into these 
huge fights. I love them so much but being together right now isn't working.
Beginner Client Statement 2

[Anxious]
 I feel so nervous all the time. Things are going well for the first time in my life. 
I've made so many changes and I can see all the positive effects, but I keep waiting for the 
other shoe to drop.
Beginner Client Statement 3

[Irritated]
 I'm trying so hard. I don't think you understand how hard it is. Some days I just 
don't feel like working so hard.
Beginner Client Statement 4

[Ashamed]
 I did what we talked about. I texted my friend when I was feeling down last 
night, but she didn't respond. I felt really upset at the time but was able to validate my 
emotions.
Beginner Client Statement 5

[Ashamed]
 I'm sorry for leaving the session so abruptly last week. I felt like you were 
judging me, and I just needed to take some space to calm down. I didn't mean it when I 
told you I thought you were a bad therapist.
Assess and adjust the difficulty before moving to the next difficulty level 

(see Step 3 in the exercise instructions).
Promoting Dialectical Thinking Through Both-And Statements
135

INTERMEDIATE-LEVEL CLIENT STATEMENTS FOR EXERCISE 11

Intermediate Client Statement 1

[Frustrated]
 You don't get it--I'd use skills if I could, but when I get anxious, I go from zero 
to 100. There's no time to use skills!
Intermediate Client Statement 2

[Sad]
 I want to leave my job, but I don't want to disappoint my boss. He's been really 
supportive. I feel like if I leave, I'm going to let him down.
Intermediate Client Statement 3

[Confused]
 My friend keeps asking for my help. She's suicidal and in constant crisis and 
needs so much support. I guess because we're both in DBT I can kind of help her figure 
out which skills to use. I want to be there for her, but it can get pretty overwhelming 
sometimes and trigger my own suicide urges.
Intermediate Client Statement 4

[Withdrawn]
 This is too hard. Talking about this stuff brings up too many bad memories.
Intermediate Client Statement 5

[Frustrated]
 I had a tough week. My parents were driving me crazy and then I got into a 
fight with my sister because she took their side. I tried to use the skills we were learning in 
group but couldn't figure out which ones to use. I thought about calling you but thought I 
should be able to figure it out by myself and didn't want to bother you.
Assess and adjust the difficulty before moving to the next difficulty level 

(see Step 3 in the exercise instructions).

136
Deliberate Practice Exercises for Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills
ADVANCED-LEVEL CLIENT STATEMENTS FOR EXERCISE 11

Advanced Client Statement 1

[Angry]
 My mom just wouldn't stop nagging me. I asked her to leave me alone, but she  
just kept going. So I got really in her face and screamed at her. I think I scared her. She 
backed off.
Advanced Client Statement 2

[Anxious]
 I don't really know where to start. I feel like I can't do anything right. I missed 
group this week because I was too anxious to face everyone. And I'm still feeling anxious 
right now. Maybe I should cancel group again today.
Advanced Client Statement 3

[Angry]
 You make me feel like I'm the problem. We always focus on what I did wrong or 
what I could do differently, but what about everyone else and their shitty behavior?
Advanced Client Statement 4

[Guilty]
 I feel like I should spend the holidays with my family. I know they want to see 
me, and they're so great in so many ways. But when I go home, my family constantly 
misgenders me, and I leave feeling depressed and even more disconnected.
Advanced Client Statement 5

[Angry]
 This is bullshit! I told you what the problem is and you just don't want to help me. 
You don't give a shit about me.
Assess and adjust the difficulty here (see Step 3 in the exercise instructions). 

If appropriate, follow the instructions to make the exercise even more 

challenging (see Appendix A).
Promoting Dialectical Thinking Through Both-And Statements
137

Example Therapist Responses: Promoting Dialectical Thinking 

Through Both-And Statements
Remember:
 Trainees should attempt to improvise their own responses before reading 
the example responses. 
Do not read the following responses verbatim unless you are 

having trouble coming up with your own responses!

EXAMPLE RESPONSES TO BEGINNER-LEVEL  

CLIENT STATEMENTS FOR EXERCISE 11

Example Response to Beginner Client Statement 1
You love him, and you need to take a break from him right now.
Example Response to Beginner Client Statement 2
You're proud of the changes you've made, and you're feeling scared about what  
comes next.
Example Response to Beginner Client Statement 3
You are doing your best, and you need to try harder.
Example Response to Beginner Client Statement 4
You were disappointed by the situation, and you accepted it for what it was.
Example Response to Beginner Client Statement 5
You really hurt my feelings, and we will work it out.
138
Deliberate Practice Exercises for Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills
EXAMPLE RESPONSES TO INTERMEDIATE-LEVEL  

CLIENT STATEMENTS FOR EXERCISE 11

Example Response to Intermediate Client Statement 1
It's hard to use skills when emotions are so high, and it's the perfect time to use them.
Example Response to Intermediate Client Statement 2
You care about your boss, and you don't want to continue in the job.
Example Response to Intermediate Client Statement 3
Someone may have good reasons for wanting something from you, and you may have 
good reasons for saying "no" or observing your limits.
Example Response to Intermediate Client Statement 4
It's incredibly painful and not to avoid these feelings when they come up is necessary to 
reduce them in the long run.
Example Response to Intermediate Client Statement 5
You can try to figure out a solution on your own, and sometimes you need help and 
support from others.
Promoting Dialectical Thinking Through Both-And Statements
139

EXAMPLE RESPONSES TO ADVANCED-LEVEL  

CLIENT STATEMENTS FOR EXERCISE 11

Example Response to Advanced Client Statement 1
Screaming at your mom helped get her to back off, and there are probably more effective 
strategies for achieving that goal.
Example Response to Advanced Client Statement 2
Avoiding group relieves your anxiety in the short term, and learning how to feel anxious 
without needing to escape it is the very thing that's going to help you decrease your 
anxiety in the long term.
Example Response to Advanced Client Statement 3
You want to get a handle on your behavior, and you want to acknowledge the impact 
other people's behaviors has had on you.
Example Response to Advanced Client Statement 4
You appreciate their good qualities, and you want to limit how much time you spend with 
them because it's hurtful when they misgender you.
Example Response to Advanced Client Statement 5
I can care about you and refuse to do something you ask.
