8

Reducing Fear, Anxiety, 

and Avoidance of Internal 

Experience

Reexperiencing and memory work described in the preceding chapter are 
intended to restructure a core sense of self related to fear and shame 
developed through traumatic experiences. This pervasive sense of self as worth-
less or insecure is automatically activated, much like overgeneralized trauma 
fear responses, as a holistic response to current interpersonal situations that 
resemble past trauma. This chapter, however, focuses on reducing discrete 
maladaptive emotions of fear and anxiety that are secondary to underlying 
thoughts and feelings. These secondary reactions are a major type of emotion 
(see Chapter 3) that is frequently observed in complex trauma. Working with 
these types of emotion requires interventions described in this chapter that  
specifically focus on the obvious and observable underlying cognitive-affective 
processes. The chapter that follows this one focuses on similar underlying 
processes related to guilt and shame.
Fear and anxiety frequently result in avoidance or distancing the self from 
trauma feelings and memories, which, in turn, interfere with in-session  
processing and recovery from trauma. Thus, interventions described in this 
chapter also are aimed at helping clients to allow, explore, and thus make 
sense of previously avoided emotional experience. This is different from 
simply admitting to or labeling one's feelings, although those are necessary 
first steps. Many clients can name their feelings yet do not allow themselves 
to feel the depth or intensity of those experiences fully. The distinction 
between admitting feelings and fully allowing their experiential impact was 
evident in the study described in Chapter 6 on the imaginal confrontation 
(IC) procedure that asked clients to identify the most helpful aspects of emotion- 
focused therapy for trauma (EFTT; Holowaty & Paivio, 2012). The aspect  
clients most frequently identified as helpful was fully allowing painful and 
threatening feelings and deeply experiencing, for the first time, the damaging 
impact of childhood abuse and neglect.
In this chapter, we compare EFTT with other approaches to working with 
secondary fear-related experience, provide clinical guidelines for distinguishing 
among the different types of fear observed in trauma therapy, and specify the 
relevant change processes and goals. In the last half of this chapter, we specify 
different types of observed experiential avoidance and appropriate intervention 
for each. These include step-by-step guidelines for helping clients allow 
emotional pain and a general model of steps to reduce fear and avoidance of 
internal experience. This model also applies to reducing self-critical processes 
presented in the chapter that follows.
PERSPECTIVES ON FEAR, ANXIETY, AND AVOIDANCE: EFTT 
COMPARED WITH OTHER APPROACHES
As noted throughout this book, fear, anxiety, and the associated avoidance of 
trauma-related internal experience are defining features of posttraumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) and complex traumatic stress disorders. It also is universally 
recognized that such avoidance perpetuates disturbance. Thus, helping clients 
to allow and accept trauma feelings and memories rather than avoid them is an 
essential ingredient of all successful trauma therapies. For example, dialectical 
behavior therapy (DBT; Linehan, 1993) for borderline personality disorder 
(which is strongly associated with a history of child abuse trauma) balances  
a focus on changing destructive behaviors (e.g., self-harm, substance abuse) 
with "radical acceptance" of self and validation of the client's feelings and per-
ceptions. DBT also teaches mindfulness meditation techniques to help clients 
observe and accept the flow of thoughts and feelings rather than react to or try 
to change them. Recent cognitive therapy for depression (Segal et al., 2013) and 
acceptance and commitment therapy (e.g., Hayes et al., 2012) similarly empha-
size acceptance of distressing internal experience. The promotion of present- 
centered awareness and nonjudgmental acceptance of internal experience are 
part and parcel of EFTT. However, although EFTT may incorporate skills 
training for severe emotion dysregulation, it relies more on therapist 
empathy to help reduce client distress and focuses more on meaning explo-
ration rather than simple observation and acceptance of internal experience.
EFTT also shares features with contemporary psychodynamic approaches to 
trauma, such as affect phobia therapy (McCullough et al., 2003), that focus on 
the defensive covering of core affective experience, except that confrontation 
and interpretation of defensive processes are not part of the EFTT repertoire. Of 
these psychodynamic approaches, attachment-based models, such as acceler-
ated experiential dynamic psychotherapy (Fosha, 2021) and mentalization 
approaches (Levy et al., 2006), are the most compatible with our approach. 
Reducing Fear, Anxiety, and Avoidance of Internal Experience
 183
Thus, the common ground would emphasize the provision of a secure attachment 
bond and empathic responsiveness to a client's feelings and to reduce defensive 
avoidance and access core affect.
Effective trauma therapies described in the preceding chapter also focus 
specifically on changing the dysfunctional beliefs associated with PTSD and 
complex PTSD. These include catastrophic expectations about and avoidance 
of external situations and internal experience. Cognitive behavioral inter-
ventions typically involve psychoeducation and Socratic questioning to chal-
lenge such dysfunctional beliefs. However, EFTT interventions, such as gestalt- 
derived two-chair dialogues, are intended to (a) increase clients' awareness of 
how their thoughts and feelings contribute to maladaptive fear, anxiety, and 
avoidance and (b) allow clients to deeply experience, in session, the discom-
fort of these emotional processes. Such deep experience of discomfort (c) acti-
vates alternative healthy internal resources (adaptive thoughts, feelings, needs) 
to counteract these maladaptive processes and helps clients allow disavowed 
painful experience. Processes like this for allowing emotional pain are described 
later in this chapter.
PROCESS DIAGNOSIS: DISTINGUISHING DIFFERENT TYPES OF FEAR 
AND ANXIETY
Appropriate intervention in EFTT requires an accurate process diagnosis of 
different types of fear and anxiety and their associated processing difficulties, 
according to the typology presented in Chapter 3. These emotion types are 
described in the subsections that follow.
Adaptive Fear and Anxiety
Although fear and anxiety are frequently considered synonymous, they have 
distinct properties and functions that have implications for therapeutic inter-
vention, as outlined next.
Fear
As a basic emotion, fear is automatically activated in response to a perceived 
imminent threat of harm and is associated with the action tendencies of fight, 
flight, or freeze (shut down, play dead) to escape or avoid the danger. Trauma- 
related problems with this type of adaptive fear concern lack of awareness and 
concomitant lack of appropriate self-protective response. For example, among 
child abuse survivors, vulnerability to revictimization is thought to stem, in part, 
from an inability to recognize or trust one's perceptions concerning danger 
(Courtois et al., 2020).
Anxiety
Anxiety is distinct from fear in that it involves anticipating a potentially harmful 
or threatening situation rather than being confronted with imminent danger. 
184 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
In moderation, anxiety can be adaptive by motivating strategies for coping 
with an anticipated danger, as in seeking help to avoid an episode of domestic 
violence. Although its inherent meaning is not a source of difficulty per se, 
problems with adaptive anxiety occur when it is of high intensity. When this 
happens, it interferes with information processing, learning, and ultimately, 
the ability to respond adaptively to the threat.
Problematic Fear and Anxiety
Problems with maladaptive fear and anxiety are easily recognized by thera-
pists and clients alike. Again, distinguishing among different types of these 
emotions is crucial to effective intervention.
Primary Maladaptive Fear
Primary maladaptive fear is an automatically activated and conditioned response 
to stimuli that have become associated with harm. This is the type of fear 
classically observed in PTSD reactions. For instance, a refugee from a country 
with a violent military may experience feelings of terror and panic at the sight 
of anyone in a uniform. Depending on the individual, this terror may result 
in rage and aggressive behavior, fleeing the situation, or paralysis. Over time, 
this fear response can generalize to other stimuli and situations--underregulated 
anger, avoiding situations, chronic hypervigilance, and overcontrol. From a 
neurological perspective, this represents a narrowed "window of tolerance" 
(Porges & Dana, 2018), such that the individual is increasingly reactive to more 
and more neutral stimuli. The problem here is an overgeneralized fear and 
avoidance of situations that, in fact, are harmless.
A Core Sense of Self as Vulnerable or Insecure
A core sense of self as vulnerable or insecure is a kind of hybrid of primary 
maladaptive fear or anxiety that is the focus of trauma reexperiencing and 
memory work described in the preceding chapter. This sense of self is orga-
nized around experiences of fear, dread, and chronic anticipation of danger 
that originated in attachment relationships and is activated in current inter-
personal situations. This pervasive sense of vulnerability is activated as a 
holistic experience. Although anticipating danger and having catastrophic 
expectations are both part of this complex self-organization and perpetuate 
feelings of anxiety, those cognitive processes do not precede or generate its 
activation. In this sense, the experience of vulnerability is distinct from sec-
ondary anxiety, and this distinction has implications for differential interven-
tion. The problem here is that the activation of an insecure or vulnerable 
sense of self makes people feel fragile, powerless, or victimized and interferes 
with self-confidence, coping, and the capacity for interpersonal relatedness. 
People can be hypervigilant, emotionally overcontrolled, and distrusting of 
others, especially intimate others. However, some individuals also can be chron-
ically angry, keeping others at a distance.
Reducing Fear, Anxiety, and Avoidance of Internal Experience
 185
Another important point is that complex trauma in attachment relation-
ships typically results in both chronic insecurity and feelings of worthlessness 
and inferiority. Thus, the sense of self is typically organized around experi-
ences of both fear and shame. Although traumatic experiences of fear on the 
one hand and shame and self-blame on the other may coexist for an indi-
vidual, one of these usually dominates as a more salient way of being in the 
world. Interventions need to target the dominant experience. However, clients 
dealing with complex trauma will typically suffer the effects of secondary 
anxiety and avoidance in their efforts to skirt the deeper primary feelings.
Maladaptive Anxiety
Maladaptive anxiety
 is most often defined as a secondary emotional experience 
because it is preceded and strongly influenced by obvious maladaptive beliefs. 
These anxiety problems can entail the misattribution of danger and lead to 
inappropriate avoidance. Anxiety also can be secondary to other painful or 
threatening feelings, such as anger, neediness, embarrassment, or shame. 
Traumatized individuals, for example, experience anxiety about the emer-
gence of feelings, memories, and bodily sensations associated with the trauma 
(resembling the anticipatory anxiety associated with panic disorder). This is 
the basis for the avoidance symptoms so characteristic of PTSD. The problem 
here is that maladaptive anxiety and the subsequent avoidance of trauma 
material interfere with processing and change. Thus, chronic anxiety needs to 
be reduced, and the meaning of any underlying emotions needs to be explored.
Complex Maladaptive Emotion Versus Emotional Pain
In addition to the different types of fear and anxiety described earlier, emotion- 
focused therapy has distinguished between complex "bad feelings" and 
"emotional pain" (Greenberg & Paivio, 1997; Pascual-Leone & Greenberg, 
2007). These types of experiences are uncomfortable, and people make efforts 
not to feel them or try to get rid of them. However, for change to occur, they 
both need to be experienced in session. Even so, they involve different change 
processes and call for different intervention strategies.
Complex Maladaptive Emotion
Feelings of hopelessness, helplessness, desperation, or despair are common 
among victims of complex trauma. These are complex secondary emotional 
reactions or products of the activations of core maladaptive emotion schemes 
or self-organizations. These can be vague feelings causing global distress that 
need to be regulated, explored, and differentiated, and the underlying issues 
related to a maladaptive sense of self need to be addressed. In general, changing 
bad feelings and global distress of this kind involves complex processes that 
correspond to those outlined earlier in the general model of change and illus-
trated in Figure 3.1. This includes exploring the cognitive-affective constituents 
(e.g., shame, sense of self as intrinsically unlovable, fear of others as rejecting, 
and belief in the inevitability of abandonment) that generate the bad feeling 
186 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
and then accessing adaptive emotions and associated healthy resources so 
that this information can be used to modify the underlying maladaptive emo-
tion scheme.
Emotional Pain
Complex relational trauma also involves intensely painful emotional experi-
ences related to feeling unwanted, unloved, worthless, or inferior or stemming 
from the loss of cherished aspects of the self or the loss of or separation from 
loved ones. This kind of feeling is not "global" in the sense of undifferentiated 
distress but rather a primary adaptive experience of emotional pain, an over-
arching embodied assessment of the casualties that have and are being endured. 
As such, emotional pain differs from basic feelings such as anger or sadness in 
that it is more complex than any single emotion (Greenberg & Paivio, 1997). This 
type of emotional pain needs to be allowed to (a) incrementally engage the 
previously thwarted feeling, (b) acknowledge that damage to the self has 
occurred, and (c) understand the precise nature of the damage or harm. Only 
after facing this damage can one integrate this information about the self. 
Over time, this process of acceptance will lead to a redefinition of the self  
and the development of new values, concerns, and coping strategies to heal 
the damage.
CHANGE PROCESSES AND GOALS
The overarching objectives for addressing fear, anxiety, and experiential 
avoidance in EFTT emerge from steps in the general model of change pre-
sented in Figure 3.1 (Pascual-Leone, 2018). These are to (a) access the under-
lying maladaptive emotion structure or scheme (i.e., fear, shame); (b) explore 
the related cognitive, affective, and motivational constituents; (c) support the 
emergence of other adaptive emotions and associated healthy resources; and 
(d) use these to modify or transform the maladaptive emotion structure. Of 
course, at each of these steps, various forms of avoidance may continue to 
interrupt progress through later steps in the model and block the process of 
change. So, although all the interventions presented next follow the general 
model, they address specific blocks that may occur at specific steps in the 
change process.
Addressing problems of underregulated fear and anxiety begins, by neces-
sity, in the first session. However, explicit therapeutic work to reduce fear and 
anxiety and experiential avoidance generally begins only after a therapist 
repeatedly observes these processes in session and there have been unsuccessful 
attempts to bypass the problem. Sometimes the problem can be bypassed, for 
example, by the therapist's calming response (e.g., "Just breathe--easy. That's 
right; it's going to be okay") and invitations to allow threatening experience 
(e.g., "I know you want to push it away, that sense of being unlovable, but 
would it be okay to just get closer to that experience"), directing attention to 
Reducing Fear, Anxiety, and Avoidance of Internal Experience
 187
the suppressed experience (e.g., "So painful. Stay with that; tell me more"), 
or through use of evocative empathic responses to increase arousal and access 
it (e.g., "So scary--all alone with all those painful feelings!"). Although EFTT 
focuses on reducing the fear and avoidance of both external and internal 
stimuli, it particularly promotes acceptance of internal experience. This approach 
to therapy fosters a desire to know, respect, nurture, and protect rather than 
reject or disavow the part of the self that has been injured. For example,  
the therapist might say, "It's important what you've been through, Paul-- 
a profoundly meaningful part of who you are. I want you to learn to embrace 
and respect that part of yourself rather than pretending to be someone you 
are not."
The following intervention principles identified in the general model of 
emotion-focused therapy (Greenberg & Paivio, 1997) are particularly relevant 
to work with trauma-related fear. We begin with identifying processes and 
goals related to the task of managing fear and anxiety, which is a prerequisite 
for other tasks. Many of these resemble the strategies used in other treatment 
approaches.
Gradual Engagement
The principle of gradual engagement is synonymous with the traditional con-
struct of gradual exposure, except that it explicitly recognizes and prizes the 
agency of the client. As discussed in previous chapters, gradual exposure 
begins with the disclosure of traumatic experiences in early sessions before 
later in-depth reexperiencing, initially working with less threatening others 
in the IC procedure or expressing feelings to the therapist. Therapists can also 
begin by deliberately using less evocative language to access threatening feel-
ings, such as anger (e.g., "You didn't like" as opposed to "You hated"). This is 
the construct of successive approximations to the threatening feelings. As a rule, 
clients decide in what manner and how often they confront trauma material.
Emotion Regulation of Overwhelming Feelings
Although the therapeutic relationship is the primary vehicle for emotion reg-
ulation in EFTT, therapy can also use well-recognized emotion regulation and 
distress tolerance strategies, such as physical grounding, distraction, or gentle 
self-talk (e.g., Linehan, 2015; Najavits, 2002), as well as mindfulness-based 
practices (Kabat-Zinn, 1990). These skills are typically integrated through 
experiential "hot" learning in the context of aroused feelings in the moment-
by-moment process of the session, as opposed to "cool" learning in an instruc-
tional or tutorial context (Greenberg & Paivio, 1997). Whether by way of the 
relationship or emotion regulation skills, or both, the goal is to help the client 
manage distress and gradually approach the feared experience (e.g., the ther-
apist might say, "It's okay. Breathe. That's good. Can you tell me what's so diffi-
cult?"). During this process, the therapist functions as a secure attachment 
188 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
figure, like a soothing parent with a frightened child or serving a similar role 
as a supportive spouse in emotion-focused therapy for traumatized couples 
(S. Johnson, 2002).
Allowing and Owning Painful Experience
The important aspect of allowing previously disavowed painful experience is 
the experiential linking of information to the self-narrative. This is the first 
step toward motivating new ways of being and new resources. For example, 
Claire (presented in the preceding chapter), whose parents minimized sexual 
abuse by her brother, eventually accessed intensely painful feelings during 
the IC procedure ("I feel dirty!"), which quickly shifted to sadness at her loss 
of innocence and self-respect. The therapist empathically responded to her 
vulnerability and encouraged Claire to imagine herself in the empty chair and 
express what she needed as a little girl. This compassion for herself and self-
soothing quickly shifted to anger at her brother, both of which were new 
adaptive experiences to help promote healing.
Facing Adaptive Hopelessness
Accepting irrevocable loss or damage and the futility of attempts to change 
circumstances or others is essential to letting go of past traumas, healing, and 
moving on. Clients need to face the fact that no matter how hard they try, they 
cannot get back what was lost or get an abusive parent or spouse to change, 
love them, apologize, acknowledge responsibility, or feel remorse. If one 
gives up struggling against the irrevocable truth, stops "wishing it were not 
true," and accepts realistic hopelessness or defeat, this will lead to giving up  
un  attainable goals or unworkable strategies. This is the principle embodied in 
the Alcoholics Anonymous Serenity Prayer and the Buddhist and mindfulness 
principles of nonattachment. Peace and serenity can be attained by accepting 
life on life's terms and focusing one's energy on working with what is. The goal 
of EFTT interventions, therefore, is to increase client reflection on this (e.g., the 
therapist might ask a client, "What's it like to know that you can push, push, 
push and still not get what you want--desperately hoping that one day he will 
see the truth?") and their acceptance of the reality of hopeless situations. 
Acceptance, in this case, must be differentiated from depressive resignation. 
We return to this topic in Chapter 11 in the context of sadness and grief.
Symbolization
Verbal symbolization reduces anxiety because it helps clients make sense of 
traumatic experiences and gain a sense of control. The capacity to communi-
cate deeply painful experiences to others also reduces the sense of isolation 
characteristic of PTSD. The goal of intervention is to help clients articulate not 
only specific feelings but also the meaning of the feelings and the internal 
Reducing Fear, Anxiety, and Avoidance of Internal Experience
 189
processes that contribute to the experience. For example, the therapist might 
ask, "What was so hurtful about that for you? I know in a general sense, but 
it's important to say what exactly was so bad for you." This shift in focus from 
the general case to that which is particular to the individual is the essence of 
promoting experiencing.
Promoting Agency
The most common action tendency of fear and anxiety is to withdraw from 
further engagement. Whether adaptive or maladaptive within a particular 
circumstance, emotional and behavioral avoidance is not typically experi-
enced as an act of personal agency. One client said candidly, "I feel like I've 
been running away from this all my life." The experience of personal agency 
can serve as an antidote to fear and anxiety, where instead of experiencing 
themselves as reacting in fear, clients come to recognize themselves as active 
participants in contributing to these experiences.
Increasing clients' awareness of how they contribute to their own anxiety 
is necessary for emotion regulation and permanent change. The goal is to 
help them recognize that it is "I" who is thinking, feeling, needing, wanting, 
or doing this. If clients experience themselves as generating their feelings, 
they begin to see how they can change them. Process observations such as 
"It's as if you have taken over where your parents left off" are in the interest 
of promoting client awareness of personal agency (for better or for worse) 
rather than blaming. Again, EFTT interventions promote the "hot" experien-
tial awareness of agency as processes emerge in session. This is particularly 
relevant in two-chair dialogues and is discussed further in a later section of 
this chapter.
INTERVENTIONS FOR MANAGING ANXIETY AND FEAR
In the face of evoked trauma material, obvious in-session indicators of under-
regulated fear and anxiety include panic, dissociation, catastrophic expecta-
tions about current situations or internal experiences, or overgeneralized fear 
in current situations. Management and emotion regulation are necessary to 
promote exploration and understanding, which is the primary focus of EFTT. 
An example is the client Monica who felt panicky remembering the events 
following her mother's suicide. In her life, she was unable to attend funerals 
because of crippling anxiety and dreaded the anniversaries of her mother's 
death. Client responses such as these are addressed through reexperiencing 
and repeated imaginal exposure, sometimes in the context of the IC proce-
dure or in conjunction with two-chair enactments (described later). When 
necessary, EFTT also uses standard skills training interventions to manage fear 
and anxiety and achieve appropriate distance from potentially overwhelming 
emotions (e.g., Linehan, 2015). These include grounding strategies to help 
190 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
clients focus on the present reality of their body (e.g., bum on the chair, feet 
on the floor), regulated belly breathing, muscle relaxation, or distraction to 
help them focus on details of the external environment (e.g., the color of 
people's clothes when walking down the street) rather than on thoughts that 
escalate anxiety.
To address dissociation, intervention additionally involves processing the 
experience and providing education about the function of dissociation. The 
longer term goal is to strengthen the self so that the client can handle a feared 
experience (e.g., the therapist might say, "We want you to no longer feel like 
that defenseless little girl, so you don't have to disappear or go away like 
that"), which also involves developing more adaptive emotion regulation 
strategies. This is followed by gradual engagement with threatening material. 
Therapists should not persist with the IC of the perpetrator if, in fact, the per-
petrator was the stimulus for dissociation. For example, one client psycholog-
ically escaped during sexual molestation by imagining herself as a "little angel" 
far removed from the experience. In our view, she would be unable to let this 
dissociative part of herself go until she felt strong enough to face those feel-
ings and memories. Successful interventions involved brief confrontations of 
the perpetrator during IC and accessing and validating her disgust and anger 
toward him in efforts to strengthen the self. The intervention also included 
two-chair dialogues between the terrified (and disgusted) little girl and the 
little angel parts of herself. These strategies finally ended with an imaginary 
dialogue in which the client thanked the little angel for having protected her 
all these years and then said goodbye to her, releasing her from that outmoded 
way of coping.
The processes of reducing avoidance and accessing self-soothing in EFTT 
are intimately connected. If we are to ask clients to allow their most fright-
ening and painful experiences, we must ensure they have the capacity to 
comfort themselves. This capacity frequently was not developed in insecure 
attachment relationships. Self-soothing skills, therefore, are taught, shaped, 
and encouraged in EFTT. It can be particularly helpful to ask clients to imagine 
what they needed as children when they were afraid or how they would 
comfort their child or a friend and then apply this to themselves as adults  
(i.e., the frightened child within). Interventions to promote self-soothing are 
presented in the following chapter on shame.
As with all processes, effective intervention to reduce client avoidance of 
internal experience involves an accurate process diagnosis. The following 
section specifies the types of experiential avoidance typically observed in EFTT 
and corresponding intervention strategies.
Different Types of Avoidance
We define 
experiential avoidance
 broadly as any internal process (distinct from 
maladaptive behavior such as substance use) that interferes with clients' 
capacity to access and express the full range of emotion, particularly adaptive 
Reducing Fear, Anxiety, and Avoidance of Internal Experience
 191
emotion. In general, we distinguish between unconscious and conscious pro-
cesses. Unconscious avoidance processes are observed in some types of low-
level experiencing, described in Chapter 5. These difficulties accessing internal 
experience are attributable to skills deficits or learned maladaptive strategies 
for coping with distress. The difficulties developed through insecure attach-
ment, which did not provide children with the freedom to attend to and 
explore their own internal experience. In abusive and neglectful environ-
ments, children learn to be externally focused and hypervigilant for signs of 
danger, or they learn that their feelings and perceptions are ignored, not 
valued, or overtly punished. This externally oriented processing style is evi-
dent in clients' narrative quality. As described in the preceding chapter on 
memory work, their storytelling may be externally focused and devoid of 
emotion (empty story), overly rational and intellectual, or vague and over-
general or incoherent. The client might also have a limited emotion reper-
toire, evident in secondary or defensive emotions that preclude exploring 
more primary experience--for example, chronic anger covering fear or sad-
ness. These clients typically require deliberate emotion coaching in the form 
of psychoeducation, direction, and guidance, as described in Chapter 5 in the 
section on deepening low-level experiencing, before they can begin to approach 
and allow emotional experience. This process requires patience and persistence 
over several sessions to gradually deepen experiencing.
Secondary Emotions Covering Adaptive Emotions
One form of avoidance consists of a simple sequence in which a primary emo-
tion is quickly followed by another emotion that functions to regulate, dis-
tance, or protect the individual from the initial experience. In psychodynamic 
terms, these are considered defensive emotions. This process can be either 
conscious and deliberate or unconscious, and the client is unaware of the 
underlying emotion. In these cases, where one emotion is dominant, clients 
usually have a limited emotional repertoire. Markers of secondary defensive 
emotions are evident when the client repeatedly expresses, for example, hurt, 
sadness, or fear concerning maltreatment but seems to have no access to 
anger. Alternatively, the client has been deeply hurt but only expresses anger. 
There may be brief and subtle verbal or nonverbal indicators of the under-
lying emotion, but this quickly disappears. More complex sequences include 
the client experiencing primary shame, then expressing secondary anger at 
being humiliated, followed by feeling guilty or anxious about their anger. All 
these sequences that involve secondary emotion are typically also mired in 
global distress because secondary emotion usually also lacks the same depth 
of specificity of meaning that one finds in primary emotion.
At markers of secondary emotion covering more primary emotion, the 
therapist can invite clients to examine what they are feeling (e.g., "Something 
about her rejection made you feel angry?"). This can open an opportunity to 
help the client access primary experience--in this case, hurt. Frequently, 
192 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
however, intervention also requires the therapist to make explicit process 
observations and discussions with clients about how a specific experience 
seems to dominate their repertoire and possibly serves some protective (i.e., 
defensive) function. This can be accompanied by providing psychoeducation 
about normal emotional processes--distinguishing between adaptive and mal-
adaptive emotion, for example--and collaborating on the goal of expanding  
clients' emotion repertoire.
For example, a client had a history of anger control problems, and anger 
dominated his emotional experience. During one session, he expressed anger 
at his wife for using his abuse as a child against him in arguments. Helpful 
interventions validated his anger at betrayal and directed his attention to 
more vulnerable experience (the therapist said, "I hear how angry you are. 
And at the same time, it must be so hurtful to have her take your trust and 
use it against you like that"). He then was able to acknowledge that he felt 
like his wife probably did not love him. This opened the door to exploring 
how his anger had pushed others away and deprived him of the connection 
and love he wanted. The therapist used empathic responses to evoke and sup-
port his sadness, loneliness, and longing for connection and love (e.g., "So, 
under all that anger is a sad and lonely man, hungry for love and yet pushing 
others away for fear of being hurt"). Over the course of several sessions, the 
client was able to acknowledge his more vulnerable experience and receive 
comfort and support from the therapist. Interventions also validated his need to 
protect himself and addressed how he could feel safe while expressing vulnera-
bility outside of the session.
Conscious and Deliberate Suppression
Conscious suppression of emotion is readily observed in therapy sessions as 
clients approach painful or threatening feelings and deliberately pull back. 
Markers include explicit statements (e.g., "I don't want to cry"), nonverbal 
self-interruption of emerging experience (e.g., tears well up, and the client 
deliberately suppresses them), or minimization of pain or harm (e.g., "It 
could be worse," "My parents tried their best"). From a narrative perspective, 
this type of client storytelling involves "competing plotlines" (Angus et al., 2019; 
Paivio & Angus, 2017), indicating an internal conflict between maladaptive 
suppression and adaptive, although painful, emotional experience. The 
overall task, described in the following section, is to help clients allow emo-
tional pain.
HELPING CLIENTS ALLOW PRIMARY EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCE
When painful but adaptive emotion is consciously suppressed or overcontrolled, 
the change process involves helping clients allow this avoided material to access 
its adaptive information.
Reducing Fear, Anxiety, and Avoidance of Internal Experience
 193
Addressing Difficulties With Allowing Painful Emotion
The pain of rejection or loss can feel like it will destroy oneself and thus may 
be avoided as a deliberate self-protective strategy. Approaching painful emo-
tion requires gradually overcoming the fear of falling apart or being destroyed 
by it, followed by a conscious decision to allow and engage it. Activating the 
pain-producing emotion structure through gradual engagement (exposure) 
modifies a client's belief that they cannot handle the pain, which is then followed 
by meaning reconstruction.
The process of allowing emotional pain in emotion-focused therapy has been 
studied using analyses of videotaped therapy sessions and clients' descriptions of 
their experience of allowing previously avoided painful material (Bolger, 1999; 
Greenberg & Bolger, 2001). Convergence of these findings resulted in the 
four-phase process outlined next. It should be clear that this is a metatask that, 
like EFTT itself, may unfold over many sessions and may incorporate and be 
embedded in other interventions and tasks.
Approaching
In the first phase, previously avoided experience is approached and discussed. 
For example, after several sessions, a client, "John," was encouraged to describe 
in detail the events surrounding the drug overdose and death of his mother 
(see the preceding chapter on memory work)--coming home from school 
and seeing the ambulance and police around his house. Interventions that 
facilitated the client approaching such painful material included highlighting 
his strengths, resources, and resilience throughout the therapy process and 
using emotion regulation strategies. Therapists, above all, need to communi-
cate compassion for their client's pain and validate how hard it is to approach 
these feelings (e.g., "It's terrible for a child to feel so alone and afraid. I know 
it must be so hard to feel that again"). Therapists must also communicate the 
importance of owning these experiences as part of the self and provide support 
(e.g., "It's okay, John, let it come. This is so important").
Allowing
In the second phase, while reliving a traumatic experience, clients see and 
accept themselves as having been damaged by the trauma. This can be a 
threatening experience at first, as clients begin to appreciate the weight of 
their emotional pain. John saw himself as a defenseless little boy ripped away 
from his beloved mother when he was placed in an orphanage after her 
death. This step in the process involves a conscious decision on the part of a 
client to fully allow the pain of the experience, despite their fear. In this 
phase, one of the goals is to help clients tolerate the complex set of feelings 
and realizations that emerge in the process. For John, facing the pain of his 
mother's death and the subsequent brutality and betrayal he experienced in 
the orphanage also involved facing his rage and the hopelessness and despair 
of knowing that he had never received the love and nurturing he needed. He 
also needed to face and accept his history of coping through substance abuse 
194 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
and the wasted years and loss of opportunity and forgive himself. Gradually 
and with time, therapists' provision of comfort and empathic affirmation are 
internalized by the client. These internal resources, in turn, help establish 
stability in the face of what was previously overwhelming and provide access 
to a more self-affirming stance.
Exploring
In the third phase, questions and doubts about the newly acknowledged view 
of self open the door to self-exploration. This requires helping clients stay 
with feelings of being shattered, fully acknowledge the harm done to them, 
identify the cause of damage and the person(s) responsible, and allow the full 
expression of feelings of anger and sadness about traumatic events. This can 
be a time to introduce or reintroduce IC or evocative exploration (EE).
The IC with another client, "Martha," began with expressions of anger 
toward her husband, who had abandoned her and her four children 30 years 
earlier ("I hate you. How could anyone be so heartless?"). This activated a 
shift into deep sobbing and fully experiencing the pain of her sadness and loss 
for the first time. The therapist's soothing responses (e.g., "So many tears. Let 
it come") helped Martha sink into her vulnerability and weep for her suf-
fering. This process also accessed questions about herself that later could be 
explored:
CLIENT:
How could I have put up with his crap for so long?!? Was I so 
desperate?
THERAPIST:
So, you were willing to accept anything he threw your way, 
desperate for . . .?
CLIENT:
His love, I guess. But he never loved me--was always putting 
me down or going off by himself. I just didn't want to see it.
THERAPIST:
Didn't want to face the truth; it was too . . .?
CLIENT:
Devastating. I didn't think I could survive, literally. I felt like I 
might not survive.
THERAPIST:
Like your very life depended on him.
This exploration led to a shift in Martha's view of herself from a vulnerable 
and victimized young mother to a mature woman who had survived and 
raised her four children on her own.
Integrating
In the fourth and last phase of this process, the painful experience is accepted 
and integrated into the sense of self. Clients have a clearer view of themselves 
and how these experiences functioned in their lives. They can clearly express 
feelings associated with damaging people and events and possibly take responsi-
bility for contributing to their own pain (e.g., "My anger has pushed others 
away"). Therapist responses that support this new sense of self (e.g., "It's like 
Reducing Fear, Anxiety, and Avoidance of Internal Experience
 195
your entire life has been defined by that moment--abandoned, terrified, and 
alone") facilitate an increased sense of personal agency and control rather 
than victimization. Fully allowing experience also mobilizes the associated 
needs that challenge maladaptive beliefs associated with the painful state. 
Knowing one's wants and needs empowers the individual to assert bound-
aries or seek out support, either internally, in the form of compassion and 
self-soothing, or interpersonally, from the therapist or others. According to 
Bolger (1999), this is the process of recognizing "covers" or the maladaptive 
ways one has hereto avoided pain (e.g., through substance abuse, excessive 
work, control of others). Therapy can involve a separate process of helping 
clients gradually make different life choices to address this.
Case Example: Reducing the Self-interruption of Emotion
The client Angela (Paivio, 2013), who was exposed to extreme family violence 
in childhood, initially struggled between a desire to express her feelings--to be 
free and authentic--and be overcontrolled. The intervention aimed at helping 
her integrate her authentic emotional experience by allowing pain and accessing 
self-soothing resources. In the following excerpt, the therapist affirmed her vul-
nerability in approaching painful memories of herself as a child and validated 
the client's struggle to suppress her feelings. At the same time, the therapist 
provided encouragement and support to help Angela relinquish overcontrol, 
as well as evocative empathy and process directives to activate her painful 
feelings related to unmet childhood needs.
THERAPIST:
Is there a specific memory or event you would like to focus on?
CLIENT:
When I picture myself, it's like just a little girl in a dungeon.
THERAPIST:
In a dungeon--that's a very sad image.
CLIENT:
[
wipes tear, shrugs shoulders
] There's worse. [
minimization
]
THERAPIST:
Yes, there's worse, but it's not a way you want your little girl to 
be raised, in a dungeon. [
The client nods her head in agreement
.] 
Can you speak from what it was like for you?
Here, Angela was obviously trying to suppress her tears. The therapist val-
idated her struggle but focused on bypassing suppression and accessing the 
healthy side of self. She helped the client express her sadness by specifying all 
the things she missed out on as a child and empathically responding to those 
losses.
THERAPIST:
I know it's hard--you're trying to hold back--but if you can 
try and get in touch with that little girl, Angela, in a dungeon. 
What is she feeling? Lonely?
CLIENT:
Helpless--you said it before.
THERAPIST:
Helpless, yes, totally helpless--just shut out and helpless and 
alone.
196 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
CLIENT:
[
suppressing tears
] I'm sorry; I don't like to cry.
THERAPIST:
I know you don't want to cry, but . . . just a lot of tears for that 
little girl; she missed out on a lot. [
The client silently weeps.
] 
What did you miss the most, do you think?
CLIENT:
[
wiping tears
] I think those happy childhood memories--you 
know--that people talk about.
THERAPIST:
Yes, children should be happy, carefree, and have all kinds of 
happy memories. You got cheated.
CLIENT:
My mom and dad, they tried [
minimization
].
THERAPIST:
They tried, and your strength is in understanding where they 
are coming from. But it doesn't change the pain that you went 
through. It's important.
CLIENT:
Yes. [
wiping eyes with a tissue
]
THERAPIST:
You missed out on some precious things.
Once Angela had allowed the pain of her childhood memories, even momen-
tarily, she also accessed healthy anger and held her father responsible. The 
therapist's empathic responses supported and encouraged this new assertive 
expression. In later sessions, Angela was encouraged to engage IC or EE with 
her imagined father to integrate this new perspective further.
General Model of Resolving Intrapersonal Conflict
Self-interruption is one type of intrapersonal or "self-self" conflict, along with 
catastrophic expectations, generating anxiety, which is discussed later. (Self- 
criticism generating guilt or shame is discussed in the following chapter). 
When emotions are interrupted by client beliefs or injunctions against feelings 
(e.g., "Anger is a sin," "Crying is feeling sorry for oneself") and catastrophic 
expectations about emotional experience and expression (e.g., "If I start 
crying, I will never stop"; "If I get in touch with my anger, I will go crazy or 
hurt someone"; "If I get in touch with my anger, I will look like my father"), 
the first step is to provide accurate information about adaptive emotional 
experience, the negative consequences of suppression, and the process of 
recovery. Once clients are on board with the value of the task, the next step 
is to explore and understand the self-interruptive process. Importantly, the 
self-interruptive process needs to be explored in depth only if the emotional 
block seems impassable. The general rule of thumb is to bypass working with 
self-interruption and avoidance if it is possible to do so. If the client can be 
encouraged to express primary emotion with the support of validation and 
empathy alone (as was the case with the client Angela, described earlier), the 
intervention will not be needed.
The overarching goal is to help the client accept the suppressed emotion, 
experience it in awareness, and express it. Subgoals are to (a) increase client 
Reducing Fear, Anxiety, and Avoidance of Internal Experience
 197
awareness of how they interrupt their experience or contribute to their fear and 
anxiety (the thoughts and feelings involved), (b) increase client awareness of 
the negative experiential consequences of self-interruption, and (c) motivate a 
desire to allow the interrupted experience. Again, understanding how one's 
thoughts and feelings contribute to one's experience strengthens the self 
because it increases agency and control. Although the techniques differ, cog-
nitive behavior therapy approaches, which many readers will be familiar 
with, also help clients understand the connection between their maladaptive 
beliefs and, for example, depression or anxiety. If clients do not understand 
the connection, they cannot change.
The following general model presents the process of resolving the intra-
psychic conflict between a dominant, maladaptive part of self (suppressing, 
catastrophizing, criticizing) and the subdominant part of self that feels the 
effect of these maladaptive processes (squashed, afraid, guilty, or shamed). 
The traditional gestalt (Perls et  al., 1951) conceptualization of the conflict 
between the "top dog" (the dominant maladaptive part of self) and the 
"underdog" (the weaker experiencing part that has "no voice") is a simplified 
but useful framework for understanding this intervention process. For our 
purposes here, we focus on the conflict between feelings that push for expres-
sion and the part of the self that squashes that experience. The therapist's job 
here is to support the underdog, the healthy part of the self that is chronically 
squashed, and help that part have a voice.
Chair work for intrapersonal conflict has been studied and refined to specify 
several distinct steps. Moreover, separate tasks have been formally created for 
resolving self-criticism, self-interruption, and anxiety (e.g., Elliott & Shahar, 
2019; Watson & Greenberg, 2017; Watson et al., 2019). We present here a 
general model (see Figure 8.1) that focuses on commonalities among these 
different tasks viewed as internal obstacles and, therefore, substeps in the 
larger task of resolving complex trauma. Many clients find it easier to engage 
in two-chair dialogues between parts of the self than to imaginarily confront 
perpetrators in the IC procedure. However, even when clients are unable to 
engage in two-chair work (e.g., because of performance anxiety), the general 
model can act as a guide to the intervention process, just as the model of res-
olution described in Chapter 6 guides the less stressful EE intervention.
Figure 8.1 presents client processes and interactions between the dominant 
(top of Figure 8.1) and experiencing parts of self (bottom of Figure 8.1). The 
following sections describe therapist operations to promote those processes. 
The focus is on working with self-interruption, which is typically also accom-
panied by anxiety-producing messages (i.e., it is not safe to feel). As in IC, 
two-chair interventions involve a reiterative rather than linear process. A case 
example illustrating this process model follows.
Collaborate on and Structure the Task
Following a marker of intrapsychic conflict, the initial step involves identi-
fying and separating the two sides of the self and establishing contact between 
them. In the case of the marker for self-interruption, the therapist observes 
198 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
PHASE 2
MARKER
* 
Self-criticism
* 
Catastrophizing
* 
Interruption of
   feeling
PHASE 1
SPECIFY
negative
message
(content and
quality) 
INTENSIFY OR
EXAGGERATE
negative message
VALUES AND
STANDARDS
SOFTENING
* 
Understanding
* 
Self-compassion
* 
Openness to
   compromise
EMOTIONAL
REACTION
* 
Ashamed
* 
Afraid
* 
Constricted
PAIN OR
DISCOMFORT 
of shame, fear,
constriction
HEALTHY
PROTEST
NEEDS
* 
Support
* 
Confidence
* 
Free expression
NEGOTIATE 
relationship with self
INTEGRATE
new sense of self
FIGURE 8.1.
 Model of Resolving Intrapersonal Conflict in Phase 2 of Emotion-Focused Therapy for Trauma
Note.
 Adapted from 
Facilitating Emotional Change: The Moment-by-Moment Process
 (p. 193), by L. S. Greenberg, L. N. Rice, and R. K. Elliott, 1993, Guilford Press. 
Copyright 1993 by Guilford Press. Adapted with permission.
Reducing Fear, Anxiety, and Avoidance of Internal Experience
 199
some emerging experience and the client pulling back (e.g., "You got in touch 
with some anger there, but something happens--somehow it's hard to stay 
with it") and further observes that this process has occurred repeatedly in 
therapy (i.e., is not easily bypassed). The client recognizes this pattern, and they 
agree to engage in the two-chair procedure to understand better and eventually 
change the maladaptive pattern.
Structuring the procedure resembles structuring the IC procedure, described 
in Chapter 6, except the client is enacting an internal dialogue between two 
parts of the self. We have found it most helpful for clients to sit in their usual 
chair when they are speaking from the healthy part of self that is being inter-
rupted or suppressed. This helps them identify with that part of self throughout 
therapy. They will sit in the opposite chair when speaking from the dominant 
maladaptive suppressing part of the self.
Articulate the Negative Message
It is most naturalistic and effective to begin the dialogue with the client taking 
the role of the dominant part of the self (top of Figure 8.1). As in the early 
stage of IC, when the purpose of imagining the negative other is to evoke a 
response in the self, the purpose at this stage is to evoke a reaction in the part 
of self that is being suppressed, the healthy experiencing self. Again, analo-
gous to IC, when psychological contact between the self and imagined other is 
critical to the success of the intervention, contact between the two sides of self is 
critical to the success of two-chair enactments. This promotes clients' experien-
tial awareness of agency and the role they play in the self-interruptive process. 
Once the client enacts their interruptive (and anxiety-producing) process, 
they are directed to switch chairs and attend to their internal experience in 
response to being shut down and threatened (bottom of Figure 8.1).
Specify and Differentiate the Negative Message
During the next step, therapists ask clients to elaborate and express their posi-
tion (top of Figure 8.1) to the suppressed and/or frightened experiencing part 
of the self (e.g., "Don't say anything because you will look weak," "Don't say 
anything because you will be taken advantage of"). This is the specific content 
of the dominant negative message. Clients should also be encouraged to pay 
attention to their vocal quality, the implied warning, or domination. This 
increases client awareness of the specific imagined dangers--in this case, of 
speaking up (bottom of Figure 8.1) and the negative impact this has on self.
Intensify the Negative Message
Once the specific negative message is identified, intensification interventions 
(top of Figure 8.1) by the therapist and evocative empathy can be used to exag-
gerate this message (e.g., "Never, under any circumstances, show your feelings; 
keep them tightly bottled up inside"). Clients could be encouraged to attend 
to bodily experience and affect directed toward the experiencing self (gestures 
of warning, demanding, pressuring) or enact how they stop themselves from 
200 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
feeling and expressing "their truth" (e.g., "It is almost like you literally stop 
yourself from speaking, isn't it? Can you try doing that on purpose--see how 
it works? What is it like if you put your hand over your own mouth as you 
try to speak?"). Such enactments are sometimes contrived, but they bring to 
awareness the agency a client has in actively holding themselves back. They 
also are intended to evoke a response in the experiencing self (bottom of 
Figure 8.1).
The therapist then asks the client to switch to the experiencing chair (bottom 
of Figure 8.1), directs their attention to the negative impact and discomfort of 
the self-interruptive message, and communicates this to the dominant other 
(e.g., "Stay with that, tell this other part of yourself how it feels when he 
shuts you down. Tell him about the effect this has on you"). In one creative 
example using enactment and embodied experience, a client said she "pushed 
her feelings to the side." The therapist encouraged her to enact pushing her 
feelings (in a backpack) further and further to the side until she was eventually 
crouching under a table. This elicited client discomfort and an expressed desire 
to get out--the next step in the resolution process.
Such enactments are expressions of tacit and implicit processes of how 
people may be constricting or prohibiting their feelings. Making that process 
palpable and deliberate is a key aspect of bringing the unhealthy process into 
awareness. Notice that cognitive approaches focus on catastrophic expecta-
tions, which has some affinity here, but the process of self-interruption and 
inhibition typically involves a process that is deeper than the words or beliefs. 
There is frequently also a preverbal and body-based component to staving off 
one's feelings.
Elicit Healthy Protest and Needs
Increased experiential awareness of the negative impact and discomfort of 
squashing or scaring the self (e.g., tension, difficulty breathing, collapse into 
powerlessness) elicits mixed feelings in a client. While part of the experience 
is painful and aversive, it typically also elicits a healthy defensive protest 
(bottom of Figure 8.1). The therapist's task at this point in the task is to iden-
tify and promote these latter reactions to mobilize healthy strivings for self- 
expression, which challenge maladaptive self-interruption This process resembles 
cognitive interventions intended to increase awareness of irrational beliefs 
about the dangerousness of internal experience. However, rather than 
emerging from a top-down rational or logical process (as in a cognitive 
approach), the challenges in EFTT are generated bottom up, emerging from 
the client experiencing the impact of squashing oneself in the session. Further, 
while a cognitive approach typically looks for "evidence against" to clarify the 
"rational truth" for clients, an emotion-focused approach emphasizes the 
aversive affective reaction to being squashed, an entirely different way of 
mobilizing assertion.
The client is encouraged to present the perspective of the experiencing self: 
"Make her see how important it is to express yourself" (bottom of Figure 8.1). 
Reducing Fear, Anxiety, and Avoidance of Internal Experience
 201
The therapist supports the client's emerging felt need and encourages them to 
express feelings and associated needs to other parts of the self.
Access Values and Standards
The client then switches chairs and responds to expressed needs from the 
dominant part of the self (top of Figure 8.1). This step is critical because it 
involves identifying and articulating the core concerns that have motivated 
self-interruption. This part of the self may express fear of change or annihila-
tion, and negative messages shift to represent healthy values and standards--
for example, efforts to protect the self (e.g., "You need me; I am afraid if you 
open up, you won't be able to handle it," or "I am afraid if you open up, you 
will get hurt"). This interaction between the two parts of the self is repeated 
until both parts understand the perspective of the other.
Promote Self-Understanding and Negotiate a New Interaction
In hearing and appreciating the perspective and needs of the experiencing self, 
the dominant negative part of the self presents their perspective from a softer, 
more vulnerable stance (top of Figure 8.1). The experiencing self, in turn, begins 
to appreciate the core concerns that drive the other part of the self (bottom of 
Figure  8.1), and they negotiate a new interaction--ways to honor adaptive 
needs for expression, as well as values and standards (e.g., "I know you are 
trying to protect me, but it's not working anymore. It would be better if you let 
me . . . at least try"). The other side of the self agrees to offer new positive 
messages and support the client in their desire for more adaptive behavior.
In working with clients experiencing complex trauma, however, this is when 
it frequently becomes clear that the client does not know how to be supportive 
toward themself and requires instruction. The therapist works with the client to 
help identify exactly what encouraging and supportive messages would be 
more helpful coming from the dominant part of the self (e.g., "You will be okay; 
I think you are strong enough to handle this, or you can ask someone for help"). 
This involves experiencing the impact of different potential supportive messages 
to see which one feels best for the individual client. The dominant part of the self 
agrees to try this new supportive behavior in the future.
Reintroduce IC or EE
Because interrupted feelings in EFTT frequently concern perpetrators of 
harm, in this final step, it might be a good time to reintroduce the IC proce-
dure (or EE alternative) and help the client express previously inhibited feel-
ings to this imagined other (or to the therapist, in the case of EE). Once the 
client can fully express and explore the meaning of these feelings, the task 
shifts, and the client moves on to resolving issues with perpetrators. This is 
carried forward in the third phase of EFTT.
Case Example of Self-Interruption in the Context of IC
An example of working with self-interruptive processes occurred with the 
client, Lynne, who had difficulty confronting her emotionally abusive mother 
202 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
in IC (Paivio, 2016). She disclosed anger at her mother's abuse, but immedi-
ately on introduction, the IC evoked fear and difficulties continuing. This 
illustrates the power of the IC to activate the core trauma-related emotion 
scheme. The therapist validated her fear and provided the process observation 
that "Mother has power to shut you down, even though she is not here." She 
then briefly explored Lynne's fear and provided encouragement and support 
to push through the block.
THERAPIST:
What holds you back?
CLIENT:
I don't know. It's just intimidating to say out loud because it 
makes it more real.
THERAPIST:
Ah, yes, saying it out loud makes it more real. But your expe-
riences ARE real. What you have to say is powerful, important.
CLIENT:
Yes [
laughs shyly
].
THERAPIST:
I will be here to help; there are no rules. Are you willing to try?
These responses helped Lynne access anger at her mother's abuse, but again, 
she quickly shut down, interrupting her experience: "I draw a blank, feel like 
I am pushing it away." This indicated that self-interruption could not easily be 
bypassed and was a marker for intervention to explore and reduce the self- 
interruptive process.
The therapist identified the struggle between parts of the self (marker)-- 
"Yes, so many deep feelings, but part of you is pushing it away"--and switched 
to a two-chair dialogue to explore the conflict and help her allow healthy anger 
and sadness. The following excerpt illustrates the therapist's process direc-
tives to access the negative messages of the dominant part of the self and 
evocative empathy to exaggerate the negative message and potentially evoke 
an adaptive reaction.
THERAPIST:
What do you say to this part of you that feels? How do you push 
it away?
CLIENT:
Don't go there . . . pretend it didn't happen.
THERAPIST:
Pretend, be a phony [
exaggerate, intensify
]. Why tell her why she 
should not go there?
CLIENT:
It's scary.
THERAPIST:
Scary. Tell her the bad things that will happen if she expresses 
her feelings [
elicits specificity
].
CLIENT:
You will feel weak . . . it scares me that she will know what I 
am saying here.
THERAPIST:
So, do not speak your truth.
CLIENT:
It's too hard; easier to pretend.
Reducing Fear, Anxiety, and Avoidance of Internal Experience
 203
The following excerpt again illustrates an intervention to intensify the nega-
tive messages to evoke a reaction, alternative adaptive feelings and needs in the 
experiencing self, then helping the client express this new experience and per-
spective to the interrupting part of the self.
THERAPIST:
You don't want to feel vulnerable. So, don't let it out. Never 
open up about your feelings [
exaggerate, intensify
].
CLIENT:
It sounds awful!
THERAPIST:
So, the other part of you says it sounds awful. Switch chairs. 
Tell her what's awful about never speaking your truth.
CLIENT:
It doesn't make sense to not talk about it, bottling it up.
THERAPIST:
Maybe tell her the benefits of talking about it [
seeking specificity 
about healthy protest
].
CLIENT:
You will get it off your chest.
THERAPIST:
How does it feel to bottle up? [
integrate embodied affect into healthy 
protest
]
CLIENT:
I don't like feeling all tense and bottled up. I want to get it off 
my chest.
THERAPIST:
How would that feel to get it off your chest?
CLIENT:
I would feel lighter.
THERAPIST:
Lighter. Can you feel that now? [
hand on chest; enhancing emo-
tional awareness
]
CLIENT:
[
brief silence, attending inward
] Yes, it's a relief. [
tears in eyes
]
THERAPIST:
So, it touches you; better to express. Are you okay to go back 
to your mother?
The emergence of a desire for authentic expression is a marker for switching 
back to IC with the mother and encouraging the expression of previously 
interrupted anger. When Lynne again shuts down and admits she "went 
numb, zoned out," the therapist encouraged her to recall a specific event with 
her mother--an autobiographical memory--to deepen her emotional engage-
ment. Lynne recalled an incident in which the mother cruelly insulted and 
degraded her younger sister, called her fat, and insisted she eat out of the  
dog bowl.
THERAPIST:
So insulting!
CLIENT:
It is!
THERAPIST:
Tell Mom how you feel remembering that incident.
CLIENT:
You have no right to talk to her that way . . .
204 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
THERAPIST:
So damaging.
CLIENT:
Yes, it's so damaging . . . you should want the best for your  
kids . . . plain and simple, you are a bully.
The therapist supported her increased assertiveness and promoted an increased 
sense of entitlement to unmet needs.
In processing the therapy experience at the end of the session, the therapist 
asked how Lynne wanted to go forward: "What if she bullies you again?" 
Lynne acknowledged she had a lot more to say and did not want to keep living 
in the past; she wanted to be herself: "I won't let her bully me anymore." This 
was the beginning of an increased ability to express authentic feelings and 
needs to construct a stronger sense of self. With clients like Lynne, working 
through self-interruptive processes and reengagement in IC can typically con-
tinue over several sessions.
Catastrophic Expectations About External Situations
Self-interruption can involve implicit or explicit catastrophic expectations about 
internal experience. These can be directly challenged by providing informa-
tion about the nature of emotional experience and worked with in two-chair 
dialogues. Experiences of trauma frequently result in unrealistic beliefs, not 
only about internal experience but also about the dangers of situations and 
consequent avoidance of these situations. In cases of complex PTSD, these 
perceived dangers and beliefs are frequently interpersonal (e.g., "I will get 
hurt," "I will be abandoned," "I will lose my sense of self"). The model of 
resolving intrapersonal conflicts described earlier can also be applied to 
reducing catastrophic expectations and anxiety about external situations 
whereby therapists ask clients to specify and understand how they make 
themselves afraid.
For example, during Phase 2 of therapy with the client Martha, described 
earlier, who had been abandoned by her husband, the focus shifted from her 
past issues to the conflict between wanting companionship and the fear of 
beginning another intimate relationship. From the dominant, fear-producing 
part of herself, Martha was asked to specify anticipated dangers that prevented 
her from entering a new relationship ("You will become too needy and 
dependent, put up with anything, be devastated by another rejection"). This 
process activated the core emotion structure in the experiencing part of the 
self in the other chair--pain and devastation at abandonment and the belief 
that her neediness caused her abandonment and pain. Therapist interven-
tions validated her need to protect herself and, at the same time, highlighted 
and exaggerated her anticipated dangers (e.g., "So you can't trust yourself--
you will be so needy you will settle for anything; you will be blind to signs of 
danger; you will be destroyed, so you better not get involved"). The therapist 
then encouraged her to attend to her response to these internally generated 
warnings. It is important to note that these therapist highlights and 
Reducing Fear, Anxiety, and Avoidance of Internal Experience
 205
exaggerations are not delivered as confrontations but rather as empathic reflec-
tions of implicit meaning.
As a result, this elicited sadness at the prospect of remaining alone for the 
rest of her life made Martha more aware of a desire for companionship and 
intimacy. Interventions supported the emergence of these healthy resources 
("Say more about how important companionship is to you"), which, in turn, 
accessed challenges to catastrophic expectations ("Why should I be a lonely 
old woman? I am not the vulnerable young mother I used to be. I've learned 
a lot in 30 years"). The therapist supported this self-affirming stance.
Challenges can always emerge for the therapist when using the interven-
tions for fear, anxiety, and avoidance, as described in this chapter (e.g., healthy 
protest does not spontaneously emerge). These are similar challenges to those 
that emerge when working with guilt, shame, and self-blame. We discuss dif-
ficulties when working with fear and shame at the end of the next chapter.
