10

Resolution of Interpersonal 

Trauma Through Adaptive 

Anger

T
he preceding chapters dealt with strengthening clients' sense of self by 
helping them work through fear, avoidance, and shame during Phase 2 of 
emotion-focused therapy for trauma (EFTT). This is necessary before clients 
can hold offenders accountable for harm, fully grieve losses, and thereby 
resolve their issues with offenders and attachment figures. This chapter marks 
the beginning of Phase 3 of EFTT, which is defined not by a particular session 
number but by establishing a more sustained focus on resolving interpersonal 
issues. As such, we open this chapter with a brief review of theory and research 
related to the resolution of trauma. After that, the lion's share of this chapter 
focuses on anger. This is because the catalyst for resolution in this phase is full 
experience and expression of previously inhibited adaptive anger at maltreat-
ment and sadness at loss, which lead to meaning exploration and change. Once 
these emotions are accessed, the process of resolution typically moves forward 
relatively quickly; this arousal and resolution phase of therapy may take only 
a few sessions. To that end, we describe research supporting the benefits of 
healthy anger expression and intervention principles and strategies, first for 
reducing maladaptive anger, then for accessing adaptive anger in response to 
maltreatment during the imaginal confrontation (IC) procedure.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0000336-011
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma: An Integrative Approach, Second Edition
,  
by S. C. Paivio and A. Pascual-Leone
Copyright (c) 2023 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
236 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
REVIEW OF THEORY AND RESEARCH ON THE RESOLUTION OF 

INTERPERSONAL TRAUMA
All treatments for complex trauma recognize that repeated betrayal and mal-
treatment at the hands of caregivers and loved ones cause a more complex 
array of disturbances than exposure to a single traumatic event (Ford & Courtois, 
2020). EFTT is a distinct treatment approach in its emphasis not only on 
reducing current symptom distress and self and interpersonal problems but 
also on resolving past issues with specific attachment figures (and offenders) 
that continue to be sources of distress.
EFTT Definition of Relational Trauma Resolution
Resolution of relational trauma in EFTT involves developing increased emo-
tional competence and more adaptive views of the self and specific others  
(i.e., perpetrators) who are the focus of therapy. More adaptive emotional pro-
cesses include reduced negative feelings concerning the other (e.g., hurt, fear, 
shame, anger, sadness) and an increased ability to acknowledge and attend 
to one's needs. When the client continues to be in a relationship with past 
offenders, it could also mean letting go of the hope that these individuals will 
meet their needs (e.g., attention, approval, respect) and letting go of expecta-
tions that the other will acknowledge responsibility for harm, apologize, or 
change. However, clients do not give up on their own needs but rather find 
alternative ways to meet them.
Resolution also includes increased self-esteem, despite the other's opinions. 
It involves reducing the self-blame for one's victimization and an increased 
ability to assert and stand up for oneself. Overall, there is a growing detachment 
or increased separation from the other and the traumatic events. Changes in 
client perceptions of the other include a shift from globally negative views of 
the other (the "bad object") to a more differentiated and realistic perspective,  
a better understanding of the other's position and actions toward the client, and 
clearly holding others responsible for the harm they have caused. The client 
may or may not feel more positively toward the other or feel forgiving. The 
relationship between resolution and forgiveness becomes important here and is 
discussed in the following section. Resolving issues in relationships with attach-
ment figures and forging a strong therapeutic relationship generalizes to reduced 
symptom distress, increased self-esteem, and reduced general interpersonal 
problems. These changes help cultivate or restore the capacity for interpersonal 
connectedness that all too often was shattered by the trauma. This definition of 
resolution in EFTT shares features with the construct of posttraumatic growth 
(Tedeschi et al., 2018). According to this idea, after struggling to come to terms 
with traumatic experiences, people report personal growth that exceeds their 
pretrauma levels of functioning. Thus, out of the devastation of trauma, there 
is the possibility of constructing something new. These new (rather than recov-
ered) benefits include increased personal strength, greater clarity about values 
Resolution of Interpersonal Trauma Through Adaptive Anger 
237
(e.g., the importance of relationships), closer connections with family and loved 
ones, and a generally stronger sense of spirituality or personal meaning in life.
The process of interpersonal resolution in Phase 3 of EFTT develops from 
the process of clients fully acknowledging the damage and harm that has been 
done to them and identifying the cause of damage and the person(s) respon-
sible (e.g., "His rages terrified me, destroyed my mother, ruined our family, 
made me take on a responsibility for the family that was way beyond my 
years"). This can be accomplished only by allowing and fully expressing feel-
ings of anger and sadness about the other and traumatic events (e.g., "I hate 
him for what he did to me and my mother," "I feel so sad that we all missed 
out on so much"). In EFTT, this occurs in the context of the IC procedure (or 
alternative) whereby clients directly (or indirectly) confront imagined perpe-
trators of harm.
The Question of Forgiveness
The construct of forgiveness in EFTT overlaps with but is not identical to res-
olution and is particularly relevant to resolution through anger. Facilitating 
forgiveness is controversial partly because it sometimes comes with moral 
and religious imperatives that may seem distasteful to some individuals. It is 
also unclear whether forgiveness is appropriate in situations of extreme cruelty 
and childhood abuse and whether forgiveness, as a therapeutic outcome, 
affords additional benefits beyond other forms of resolution (Chagigiorgis & 
Paivio, 2006). In any case, forgiveness does not involve condoning the behavior 
of offenders and bypassing anger but rather acknowledging offenses and 
working through anger.
Widely held definitions of forgiveness suggest that it requires both psycho-
logical separation from and increased affiliation with offenders. An analysis of 
posttherapy interviews with clients in EFTT indicated that although most clients 
(82%) reported resolving issues with perpetrators, only a small portion (23%) 
of those who resolved their issues also reported forgiving the perpetrators 
(Chagigiorgis & Paivio, 2006). This is consistent with findings from a study of 
emotion-focused therapy for the forgiveness of "emotional injuries" using the 
empty-chair intervention (Greenberg et al., 2008). Even in that study, with a 
nonclinical sample that explicitly aimed at forgiveness, less than half of clients 
actually forgave offenders (more "let go" of their anger).
In EFTT, specifically, clients more often forgave neglectful as opposed to 
abusive others (Chagigiorgis & Paivio, 2006). These neglectful others tended 
to be nonprotective mothers. As a case in point, recall that the client Monica 
was able to forgive her dead mother by the end of therapy. This suggests that 
clients may be more motivated to forgive primary attachment figures. This 
also could be a function of more time spent on task because more time in 
treatment was spent focusing on issues with primary attachment figures (e.g., as 
opposed to estranged abusive fathers or nonfamily members). Research on 
forgiveness also indicates that people's motivation to forgive is a function of 
238 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
many factors, including religious or moral beliefs and the belief that forgive-
ness will reduce personal distress (for a review, see Chagigiorgis & Paivio, 
2006). Moreover, clients in emotion-focused therapy for couples were more 
likely to forgive a romantic partner when they believed that partner truly 
regretted and felt shame about the transgressions (Woldarsky Meneses & 
McKinnon, 2019). This finding likely also applies to forgiveness of perpetrators 
in EFTT.
Therefore, as noted earlier, EFTT does not advocate forgiveness as a treat-
ment goal but rather leaves this up to the individual client. If forgiveness of 
the other has been an appropriate and desired goal for the client, this issue 
will surface again during Phase 3 of therapy as the client moves closer to res-
olution. Issues of forgiveness also could emerge for the first time during this 
phase as perceptions of self and other evolve. In either case, tracking clients' 
perspectives on this issue may be a key part of the resolution process.
The Process of Interpersonal Trauma Resolution in EFTT
The process of interpersonal resolution in EFTT is based on steps in the model 
introduced in Chapter 6 and presented in Figure 6.1. This resolution process 
also parallels the general process of change shown in Figure 3.1 of Chapter 3. 
In both these figures, we see that pathways to resolution and change are 
through anger and sadness or grief, which is the focus of the next chapter. Full 
expression of adaptive anger in EFTT occurs following the reduction of fear and 
shame (the focus of Phase 2 and the preceding chapters). At the emergence 
of adaptive anger, clients are encouraged to reengage in the IC (or evocative 
exploration) procedure and express anger directly to the imagined other. Again, 
the relatively uninhibited expression of adaptive emotion to imagined offenders 
marks the shift into Phase 3. Although resolution through anger does not 
necessarily occur before grieving losses, the strength that comes with anger 
frequently helps clients face the vulnerability of sadness and loss.
ANGER AND TRAUMA ACROSS THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES
There is abundant literature documenting the centrality of anger in trauma. 
Anger at violation and maltreatment is a healthy emotion that motivates self- 
defense but becomes problematic when it is overgeneralized, underregulated, 
used to cover more vulnerable emotional experience, or turned against the 
self. Because areas of the brain responsible for affect regulation develop in the 
context of secure attachment relationships, failure of brain development may 
account for the hair-trigger anger response observed in many survivors of 
child abuse trauma (Schore, 2003). Anger and aggression are also learned 
responses and ways of coping. There is considerable evidence supporting a 
link between both childhood physical abuse and exposure to violence with 
aggressive behavior later in life (Wolfe, 2007). Anger dysregulation is a particular 
Resolution of Interpersonal Trauma Through Adaptive Anger 
239
problem among war veterans who have been exposed to prolonged and 
extreme violence (Novaco & Chemtob, 2015). Dysregulated anger is also a 
feature of borderline personality disorder that is associated with a history of 
childhood abuse.
Promoting the experience and expression of anger in therapy is controversial. 
Anger is a powerful emotion, and when accompanied by aggressive behavior, it 
can have destructive personal, interpersonal, and societal consequences. More-
over, most research has demonstrated that although increasing anger arousal 
(venting or catharsis) can produce immediate relief, it does not reduce anger in 
the long term (Fernandez, 2016). Therefore, with few exceptions, reducing mal-
adaptive anger is the focus of most approaches to trauma therapy when anger is 
identified as a problem (e.g., Linehan, 2015; Novaco & Chemtob, 2015). How-
ever, some recent cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) approaches to therapy for 
complex trauma (e.g., Jackson et al., 2020) also acknowledge fear of anger as a 
problem. These approaches also include training in emotion awareness and 
assertive communication skills.
However, EFTT distinguishes among different types of anger and specifies 
criteria for adaptive anger experience and expression, as well as the circum-
scribed parameters under which anger intensification in therapy is appropriate. 
Criteria for the healthy expression of adaptive anger in EFTT (described later) 
are compatible with principles that would be applied in CBT assertiveness 
training (e.g., Linehan, 2015)--even if those treatment theories do not explic-
itly differentiate between different kinds of anger. When researchers examined 
the benefit of skills training in dialectical behavior therapy for borderline 
personality disorder, they found increases in assertive anger (rather than a 
reduction in anger, per se) mediated the benefits of treatment (Kramer et al., 
2016). This finding is consistent with EFTT theory. However, to promote these 
adaptive emotional experiences, EFTT focuses more on exploring the personal 
meaning of disavowed anger than on the behavioral aspects of skills training.
Traditional psychodynamic approaches also focus on the meaning associated 
with defensive anger, or "anger turned inward," and help clients acknowledge 
the underlying feelings or express anger at the appropriate source. Meanwhile, 
intensive short-term dynamic psychotherapy (Abbass & Town, 2013) empha-
sizes increasing arousal to increase awareness of suppressed anger and uncon-
scious impulses. EFTT includes anger intensification strategies under specific 
conditions--increasing arousal is only appropriate for accessing inhibited adap-
tive anger to access the associated adaptive information. Paradoxically, a healthy 
anger experience can sometimes facilitate forgiveness. For example, Monica 
had been unable to forgive her mother, who had committed suicide, largely 
because Monica's anger at her mother had been invalidated and suppressed for 
so many years. Once one's anger has been acknowledged, validated, assertively 
expressed, and understood, people feel stronger and more self-confident, and 
they are freer to focus on, empathize with, and forgive others.
Several research studies support the benefits of adaptive anger expression 
in EFTT and similar approaches. First, indirect support comes from outcome 
240 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
and process-outcome studies that support the treatment model, in general, 
with its emphasis on adaptive anger expression (Paivio et al., 2010; Paivio & 
Nieuwenhuis, 2001). Similar results have been reported for comparable 
emotion-focused therapies for other disorders (see Greenberg & Goldman, 
2019a) in which expression of inhibited anger is a key therapy process. A host 
of emotion-focused therapy process studies on a range of treatment concerns 
have used observational methods to track healthy assertive anger and shown that 
it predicts symptom reduction post-session and at the end of treatment (Pascual- 
Leone & Kramer, 2019). One of those studies specifically examined EFTT and 
showed that when a client's expression of assertive anger--among other primary 
adaptive emotions--increased over the course of therapy, it more than doubled 
the likelihood of good treatment outcome (Khayyat-Abuaita et al., 2019).
Direct support for the benefits of anger expression comes from studies that 
specifically examined the role of anger in EFTT. In one study (Holowaty & 
Paivio, 2012), 50% of the episodes identified by clients as helpful had anger as 
the most predominantly expressed emotion (followed by sadness, fear, and 
shame). Furthermore, results indicated that emotional arousal was signifi-
cantly higher in helpful episodes than in a group of control episodes. Another 
study found that higher arousal during both IC and evocative exploration pre-
dicted the outcome in EFTT, and again, the dominant emotion during these 
episodes was anger (Ralston, 2006). Furthermore, anger expression in EFTT 
does not appear to be simply a function of clients' compliance with their ther-
apists' directives and the treatment model. At pretreatment, 64% of clients 
identified anger-related problems among the three target complaints they 
wanted to address in their therapy. Of these, the most frequently identified 
were unresolved anger toward perpetrators of abuse and difficulties stemming 
from limited access to anger experience (e.g., powerlessness, nonassertiveness). 
Thus, many victims of complex trauma entered therapy with a limited capacity 
to access anger and its associated healthy strivings.
Another study examined the contributions of anger expression specifically in 
the resolution of child abuse trauma in EFTT (Paivio & Carriere, 2007). Client 
dialogues during the IC procedure were analyzed using criteria for healthy anger 
expression. The results indicated a moderate relationship between healthy anger 
expression and the resolution of abuse issues and interpersonal dimensions of 
change, particularly at 12 months after treatment. Together, these results support 
the beneficial effect of healthy anger expression during IC on treatment outcome 
in EFTT, particularly on interpersonal dimensions of functioning.
PROCESS DIAGNOSIS: DISTINGUISHING DIFFERENT TYPES OF ANGER
Anger is a powerful emotion that has a profound influence on self-organization 
and interpersonal relations. There are important societal implications con-
cerning displays of anger and its connection to aggressive behavior that account 
for the existing emphasis in the literature on anger regulation (Sturmey, 2017). 
Resolution of Interpersonal Trauma Through Adaptive Anger 
241
Anger involves surges of adrenaline; a loud, firm voice; erect body posture; 
and direct eye contact with the target, all of which ready a person to thrust 
forward and attack.
Adaptive Anger
The following subsections describe anger that has an adaptive function and 
specify criteria for healthy anger expression in therapy.
Primary Adaptive Anger
Like other basic affects, adaptive anger is an immediate and direct response to 
real threat or infringement in the environment that is not preceded or mediated 
by obvious cognitive or other affective components. Anger at interpersonal 
violation and maltreatment quickly mobilizes self-protective resources and 
action. It provides energy and a sense of power that readies the individual for 
self-defense or to protect one's integrity and boundaries. Interpersonally, 
anger signals others that an offense has occurred, creates separation and dis-
tance, and signals them to back off. Difficulties here concern modulating the 
intensity of anger, which can result in either dysregulation (i.e., too much 
anger) or overcontrol (i.e., too little anger, when it would be appropriate and 
adaptive). In either case, the information associated with the anger experi-
ence is unavailable to guide adaptive action. The negative consequences of 
overwhelming anger are obvious. Negative consequences of anger avoidance 
include a pervasive sense of victimization, recurrent bouts of depression, diffi-
culties with assertiveness, and problems with establishing appropriate inter-
personal boundaries. Chronic suppression of adaptive anger can also result in 
hypertension and instances of "bottle up-blow up" such that the tension of 
repeated suppression eventually results in explosive outbursts of anger that 
are disproportionate to the situation (Novaco & Chemtob, 2015).
Criteria for Healthy Anger Expression
EFTT defines healthy anger expression according to specific criteria that are con-
sistent with the definition of primary adaptive emotion (Greenberg & Paivio, 
1997; Paivio & Carriere, 2007; Pascual-Leone, 2018). These criteria inform and 
guide interventions intended to promote anger expression--for example, when 
confronting perpetrators of harm during IC.
Criteria for healthy anger expression are as follows. First, the anger must be 
directed outward toward the perpetrator rather than inward toward the self, 
and it must concern actual and specific harms, transgressions, or violations. As a 
guideline, if it is unclear what the angry client is fighting for and what unmet 
needs are being asserted, it is probably not a healthy expression of anger. 
Second, the anger must be differentiated from other emotions, such as sad-
ness, guilt, or fear. Anger expression mixed with tears or fear, for example, 
does not allow the individual full access to the cognitive, motivational, or 
somatic information specifically associated with the anger experience. Third, 
the anger is expressed assertively with the ownership of experience rather 
242 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
than aggressively, passively, or indirectly. For example, clients use "I" state-
ments rather than referring to themselves in the third person or blaming and 
complaining or attacking or hurling insults at others. Anger that is inappropri-
ately expressed does not have the desired effect on the environment, and  
consequently, adaptive needs for respectful treatment or distance are not met. 
Fourth, the intensity of anger expression must be appropriate to the situation. 
Intense emotional expressions that are a catalyst for change are not the same 
as catharsis, although relief and release of tension can play a role. Appro-
priate intensity is assessed through verbal and nonverbal indicators of arousal, 
including body posture, vocal quality, and facial expressions congruent with 
anger and the situation. Inappropriate anger intensity includes both rage that is 
overwhelming and anger that is lacking in conviction or energy. Again, in both 
instances, the associated adaptive information is neither available to guide 
one's action nor a clear social message of assertion communicated to others. 
Finally, anger expressions must include some elaboration and exploration of 
meaning. Healthy anger is not a verbal tirade but rather involves working with 
anger to understand it. This is consistent with the fundamental principle 
underlying EFTT that client experiencing is the primary source of new infor-
mation used in promoting resolution and change.
Problematic Anger
Most therapeutic approaches focus on reducing maladaptive anger but typi-
cally do not distinguish among subtypes. However, distinct kinds of problem 
anger require different intervention strategies (Pascual-Leone et al., 2013). 
The following subsections describe clinically relevant distinctions among sub-
types of problematic anger.
Primary Maladaptive Anger
Most forms of maladaptive anger are inappropriate to the situation and long 
lasting rather than immediate, fleeting responses to specific violations. 
Primary 
maladaptive anger
 is an immediate but overgeneralized response to a perceived 
environmental threat and is frequently associated with posttraumatic stress 
reactions. A rape victim, for instance, might react with rage at being touched by 
men; a survivor of child abuse, whose trust has been betrayed, might react with 
anger to others' displays of affection. In many ways, primary maladaptive anger 
is a characterologically entrenched style of responding that now undermines 
effective functioning.
Secondary Anger
Secondary anger
 is a response to maladaptive cognitions that produce, perpet-
uate, or escalate the anger (e.g., erroneous attributions of malicious intent 
or dwelling on revenge fantasies). Alternatively, secondary defensive anger 
masks more vulnerable core emotions, such as sadness, fear, or shame. Obvious 
examples are anger and aggression in response to the shame (i.e., humiliation 
fury) or fear of abandonment (i.e., the rage of desperation), as observed in 
Resolution of Interpersonal Trauma Through Adaptive Anger 
243
some clients with borderline personality disorder or some male perpetrators of 
intimate violence. In these instances, secondary anger serves the maladaptive 
function of momentarily alleviating painful feelings of vulnerability, and this is 
reinforcing when it is repeatedly successful.
Instrumental Anger
When anger is used, consciously or unconsciously, to manipulate or control 
others, it is 
instrumental
. Thus, the social impact of angry, aggressive behavior 
can act as a means for attaining a desired interpersonal goal (i.e., control). 
This, too, can be a reinforcing pattern of behavior. Aggression without affect 
is a similar but more highly antisocial behavior, although even people without 
personality disorders are susceptible to the instrumental function of anger.
Complexity of Anger Processes
The same individual can experience and express different types of anger. The 
complexity of anger experience and its accurate assessment are illustrated in 
the client Paul, who was described in earlier chapters. He had been physically 
abused by his father and sexually molested by a male relative, and he fre-
quently experienced adaptive anger and secondary defensive anger covering 
shame. Paul also had a history of using anger and aggression to control others 
and prove his masculinity. Moreover, he often felt betrayed and insulted by 
his wife and held cultural beliefs that children should respect their parents, 
blowing up at perceived signs of disrespect. Finally, he also had difficulty 
acknowledging feelings of anger about his father's abuse because he feared this 
would jeopardize their current relationship, which he had worked so hard to 
achieve. Each of these distinct anger processes required different intervention 
strategies.
Feelings of contempt and disgust also are related to anger experience. Like 
anger, these are maladaptive when directed at the self (as discussed in the 
preceding chapter) but can be adaptive when directed at others in response to 
legitimate moral transgressions and despicable behaviors (e.g., sexual abuse). 
Contempt
 involves looking down on an object with a sneer or curled lip of disdain 
("You worm!"), whereas 
disgust
 involves wanting to rid oneself of the object by 
revulsion or throwing up ("You make me sick!"). Although similar principles 
apply, accurate intervention with anger, contempt, and disgust involves accu-
rate perception and empathically responding to the nuances in meaning asso-
ciated with these different emotions.
INTERVENTION PRINCIPLES
Many of the intervention principles discussed in earlier chapters also apply to 
working with anger. In the following sections, we present examples of the 
specific ways these principles are implemented in the context of this specific 
emotion.
244 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
Regulation
Clients may inhibit their legitimate anger toward abusive or neglectful others 
for a variety of reasons, including fear of losing control, fear of being like the 
offender, or concern about unfairly blaming the other. In these cases, EFTT 
interventions validate client concerns and, at the same time, promote acknowl-
edgment of legitimate angry feelings and model, shape, and teach appropriate 
and assertive expression of these feelings.
However, anger that is underregulated does not serve an adaptive function, 
even if the anger itself is a legitimate and adaptive response to harm. High levels 
of arousal overwhelm both the angry individual and the person being con-
fronted with that anger. As emotional arousal increases, the specificity of 
meaning the client can attend to deteriorates, so what may have been productive 
loses its focus (Pascual-Leone et al., 2013). Similarly, chronic defensive anger 
covering a more vulnerable experience of hurt, sadness, or shame cuts the person 
off from the information associated with that more primary experience.
Gradual Engagement
When clients are afraid of, deny, or believe that anger is socially unacceptable, 
the change principle resembles that of gradual exposure to or engagement 
with threatening experience. Intervention involves successive approximations 
of the experience (e.g., moves from "I don't like . . ." to "feeling annoyed or 
resentful" to "feeling angry" to "feeling outraged and furious" at the extreme 
end). When clients deny feeling angry at situations that normally would evoke 
anger, therapists must use empathic responses, questions, or challenges to 
elicit a reaction or open a door for acknowledging the experience (e.g., "Sounds 
like you thought that was pretty unfair," "Did you like what she did?" "I would 
have been so pissed off!"). Here, clients are also implicitly learning the range 
and appropriate modulation of anger experience, where lived experience 
helps to challenge maladaptive beliefs that all anger is dangerous. At other 
times, intervention can focus on client actions that emerge spontaneously and 
then encourage them to put words to these actions (e.g., "What does that type 
of voice say--'how dare you'?"). Similarly, a therapist might ask the client to 
put words and meaning to their body posture, as in "I notice your fist is 
clenched as you speak. . . . Can you put words to that?" Secondary emotions 
that cover anger (e.g., guilt, fear, defeat, helplessness) are bypassed or implicitly 
discouraged by making selective reflections. Instead, the therapist validates 
and supports the client's authentic, spontaneous expression of anger at injustice, 
unfairness, or maltreatment.
A good example of gradual engagement with anger is in the client John, 
presented in previous chapters, who, following the death of his mother, was 
sent to an orphanage where he was physically and sexually abused. Initially, 
he was completely resistant to acknowledging any anger about his life expe-
riences. Intervention first needed to explore the client's resistance ("It isn't 
Resolution of Interpersonal Trauma Through Adaptive Anger 
245
'Christian' to be angry . . . I just want to be a good person"), then educate him 
about anger, and eventually used successive approximations to help him 
acknowledge his anger.
THERAPIST:
When you think now about those things [
beatings, sexual moles-
tation
] happening to other young boys, like maybe your nephew, 
how do you feel?
CLIENT:
Well, I don't like it. It bothers me.
THERAPIST:
I'm sure it does. Can you stay with that? Say more--what 
bothers you about it?
Eventually, John was able to say that the abusive priests in his residential 
school "shouldn't have done what they did; it wasn't right. They are to blame 
for all the emotional problems I've had." He was able to acknowledge his 
anger at "the system" for putting him in an orphanage and depriving him of 
his family and Indigenous culture and his anger at individual priests for 
abusing him.
Anger expression, especially toward parents, also is prohibited in certain cul-
tures. In many Asian cultures, for example, strong social norms exist about 
respecting parents and elders. In these instances, intervention involves educa-
tion about the role of adaptive anger, validating the client's desire to be 
respectful, and distinguishing parental intentions to discipline and wanting the 
best for their children from what crossed the line into cruelty and abuse. For 
example, the therapist might ask, "Do you think he had your best interests at 
heart?" The principle of gradual engagement is relevant here--from "It was not 
right," "It was too extreme," "It was cruel" to "I hated it," "I did not deserve 
that," to "It was abusive." The actual label of "anger" is not as important as 
generating sufficient arousal to activate the emotion scheme and associated 
adaptive information. For example, one client of Chinese heritage felt uncom-
fortable using the word "anger" during IC with his rageful, harshly critical 
father. His confrontations during the procedure were initially measured and 
controlled and focused on "correct" assertive communication. The therapist 
validated his discomfort and provided information about "healthy anger"  
(vs. his father's "rage") and explicit directives for engaging in IC ("This is not 
about the perfect response. What do you really feel inside imagining him railing 
at you like that? What do you want to say--from your gut?"). The client imme-
diately said to his imagined father, "Back off! Leave me alone!" The therapist 
helped him elaborate on this response ("Say more; tell him what is so toxic 
about his behavior") and eventually set boundaries (e.g., "What are you willing 
or not willing to put up with from him, your 'line in the sand?'").
Explore Secondary Anger
Secondary anger typically needs to be changed. On the one hand, anger gener-
ated by maladaptive thought processes is changed by accessing, exploring, and 
246 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
restructuring these maladaptive cognitions. Thus, working with secondary 
anger can have a more rational or cognitive intervention style (i.e., "But is this 
really working for you?"). On the other hand, if possible, changing anger that 
masks more vulnerable feelings is best accomplished by simply bypassing the 
angry, blaming reaction. This is because the goal ultimately is to access more core 
emotional experience and associated information as quickly and efficiently as 
possible. When defensive anger cannot be easily bypassed, it needs to be explic-
itly explored again to access core primary experiences. The client who rou-
tinely expresses anger at signs of interpersonal slight, for example, needs to 
gain awareness of the underlying feelings of hurt, rejection, or sadness that 
likely give rise to the defensive anger.
Identify the Instrumental Function of Anger
Appropriate intervention for instrumental anger involves confronting and 
interpreting the instrumental function of this anger and teaching more adap-
tive ways of getting one's needs met. Both secondary and instrumental anger 
can be problematic at the level of intensity, and, in this case, intervention needs 
to include teaching anger regulation strategies. All the types of anger can be 
problematic at the level of chronicity or frequency, such that anger might be 
the dominant emotion some clients experience or express. These individuals 
typically have limited awareness or experience of other (subdominant) feel-
ings, and therapeutic intervention requires emotion awareness training. This 
consists of empathic responses that direct client attention to and help them 
accurately label their other feelings. It can also can include structured exercises 
that explicitly teach emotion awareness skills (see Linehan, 2015). In many 
ways, instrumental emotion is addressed by reflecting on the narrative and 
social context of the client's emotional experience--for example, their need to 
control or overpower others in their life to ensure that their wants and needs are 
met (Pascual-Leone, Paivio, & Harrington, 2016).
Symbolize Meaning
Through exploring the experience of anger, clients come to understand their 
anger--its associated values and needs, the effects maltreatment or injustice 
has had on them, perceptions of self and offending others, and so on. This 
new information is used to construct new personal meaning. In cases of mal-
adaptive or secondary anger, the maladaptive meaning (e.g., misattributions 
of hostile intent) can be examined and modified.
INTERVENTIONS FOR CHANGING MALADAPTIVE ANGER
The following subsections describe EFTT's approach to reducing maladaptive 
anger, beginning with reducing dysregulated anger and aggression.
Resolution of Interpersonal Trauma Through Adaptive Anger 
247
Regulating Anger
Before turning our attention to the process of resolving interpersonal trauma 
through the promotion of healthy anger experiences, it is important first to 
clarify what types of anger not to promote and how to work with them. As noted 
earlier, chronic and underregulated anger are frequently associated with expo-
sure to trauma, particularly complex interpersonal trauma. Problems with 
anger dysregulation and associated aggressive behavior can be difficult to 
change (Novaco & Chemtob, 2015; Pascual-Leone et al., 2013) because they 
might be reinforcing and part of the individual's personality style. Just as in 
recovery from phobia, neural pathways never completely disappear, but 
motivated clients can carve out more preferred pathways, and old responses 
can fade with time and disuse (Lane & Nadel, 2020; LeDoux, 2012). Maladaptive 
anger interferes with interpersonal trauma resolution; the client is stuck in an 
earlier stage of emotional processing, characterized by hostile blaming and 
rejecting anger (refer to Figures 3.1 and 6.1).
Although EFTT has an affinity with CBT strategies with respect to this area, 
EFTT is not an anger management therapy. Rather, strategies for regulating or 
reducing this type of anger must be integrated into the resolution process; it 
should be part of the personal meaning-making process, not an isolated skill 
for reducing the intensity of a specific emotion. In many instances, it will be 
more important for clients with chronic anger problems to focus on grief and 
sadness expression (instead of anger) as a route to the resolution of complex 
trauma. However, the dilemma is that anger in response to injustice, violation, 
and maltreatment also has legitimacy and should not be avoided. Therapy 
must validate clients' experiences of adaptive anger and find ways to help them 
express it appropriately.
Moving Beyond Secondary Anger
The first step in working with chronic anger in EFTT is assessing the client's 
capacity to attend to and identify the internal experiences associated with 
anger and the factors (internal and external) that contribute to escalating and 
perpetuating anger. Limited awareness must be increased for clients to gain 
control of their anger experience (e.g., the therapist might say, "So, when you 
think your kids don't respect you and dwell on that; you feel yourself getting 
more and more angry"). The next step is to help clients distinguish between 
different types of anger experience, so they know when to accept, express, 
modulate, or bypass their anger and attend to more core vulnerable experi-
ence. If necessary, intervention will include strategies for downregulating 
emotion, such as breathing, relaxation, time-out, or distraction, that have 
been well articulated in the CBT literature. Memory evocation strategies, 
such as those described in the preceding chapters, can be used to help clarify 
the triggers for problematic anger reactions. In instances of secondary anger, 
the underlying cognitive-affective processes need to be brought into aware-
ness and maladaptive aspects changed. Of course, EFTT characteristically 
248 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
focuses more on exploring meaning than directly challenging maladaptive 
cognitions (e.g., the therapist might ask the client, "What's that all about, this 
sense that disrespect from your teenage kids is so intolerable?"). Anger at 
perceived disrespect, as in the case of Paul, discussed earlier, also could be 
understood as a defense against hurt or shame, in which case the therapist 
directs client attention to the core experience (e.g., "So it triggers some sense 
that you're a bad father, incompetent? That must hurt a lot. Let's stay with 
that; it's important").
In terms of confronting offenders in the IC procedure, anger intensification 
is avoided with clients who have a history of problems with anger control. 
However, the therapist models and sometimes directly teaches appropriate 
assertive expression skills, using the guidelines for healthy anger expression 
presented earlier. For the client whose dominant emotion is anger, resolution 
of past trauma will include acknowledging appropriate anger at abuse, but 
resolution may largely occur through accessing hurt and sadness, which is 
less available.
An example of this is Paul, who had a history of anger and aggression 
problems. He recognized that his violent father had been a bad role model and 
that he, himself, used anger to feel powerful and control others. He was moti-
vated to change this behavior but still was quick to anger, and anger experi-
ence initially dominated therapy sessions.
Early in therapy, the therapist observed that Paul's anger dominated and 
threatened to derail the therapy process. She collaborated with him on shifting 
this focus from anger to accessing more vulnerable feelings. Paul was able to 
attend to his internal experience and had learned strategies for deescalating 
anger arousal, so he was able to explore the thoughts and feelings that contrib-
uted to his anger and its escalation. Different types of anger and underlying 
vulnerable experience were identified and explored as they emerged in ses-
sions ("hot" processing). Over time, the client allowed himself to be vulnerable 
with the therapist. Resolution of past trauma finally involved the client acknowl-
edging his contribution to his pain through maladaptive anger and grieving 
the many losses he had endured. In particular, he was able to acknowledge 
and express, both in session and to his aging father in real life, the deep sadness 
he felt at having missed out on a healthy and supportive relationship with his 
father when he was growing up. This, in turn, strengthened his current rela-
tionship with his father.
INTERVENTION FOR PROMOTING PRIMARY ADAPTIVE ANGER
Unlike problematic anger that needs to be reduced, difficulties with anger also 
concern its constriction. In short, sometimes the problem is not enough healthy 
anger. This problem is frequently addressed in the context of resolving issues 
with perpetrators of abuse and neglect.
Resolution of Interpersonal Trauma Through Adaptive Anger 
249
Model of Resolution Using Imaginal Confrontation in Phase 3
The model of resolution using IC was presented in Chapter 6 (see Figure 6.1). 
We review it here, focusing on later stages in the process and the specific role 
of adaptive anger in the resolution process. Recall that IC is initially intro-
duced around Session 4 at the end of Phase 1 once a safe therapeutic relation-
ship has been established. It is then used in conjunction with other procedures 
throughout Phase 2 of therapy (i.e., memory work, working through self- 
interruption, self-criticism). The frequency of client participation in IC over 
the course of therapy will vary depending on individual client processes and 
treatment needs.
As fear and shame are worked through and clients come to tolerate working 
with trauma material, client difficulties with confronting imagined perpetra-
tors during the IC procedure gradually diminish. Clients become more able to 
freely express previously inhibited feelings directly to the imagined other. 
Then, Phase 3 of EFTT begins with the clear and uninhibited expressions of 
adaptive emotion--in this case, anger at the maltreatment they have suffered. The 
Degree of Resolution Scale presented in Appendix C can be used to track client 
progress and set session-by-session process goals. The following example of a 
client, "Julie," working through sexual abuse in EFTT, illustrates the three stages 
in the model. Because the process of resolution is a dynamic and reiterative one, 
later sessions (e.g., in Phase 3) sometime recapitulate aspects of the previous 
phases. This excerpt shows such rapid recapitulation of previous work and then 
advances through steps in the resolution process (see Figure 6.1).
CLIENT:
He [
her father
] is such a disgusting pig! Who treats their own 
daughter like that?
THERAPIST:
I hear how much you hate him, despise him. Tell him over 
there [
points to chair
] what you hate. Make him understand.
CLIENT:
Yes, I hate the way you manipulated and corrupted me for 
your own selfish needs. You perverted everything. I was inno-
cent, and you ruined my childhood; you made sex disgusting. 
I hope you rot in hell! [
sighs, withdraws
]
THERAPIST:
What happened just now, Julie--you sigh and kind of collapse?
CLIENT:
I don't like it. I sound just like him.
THERAPIST:
But you're not him; you're nothing like him. You're justifiably 
angry, and you want to see him punished for his despicable 
behavior, for his crimes. Tell him.
CLIENT:
Yes, I do want to see you punished. You deserve to be pun-
ished for all the harm you've done. You fucked me up royally. 
My life has been such a mess, but I'm not going to let you ruin 
my life anymore.
250 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
THERAPIST:
How do you feel saying that?
CLIENT:
It feels right. He was the adult; I was just a little kid. I deserved 
love and security, not the twisted life he imposed on me.
THERAPIST:
How do you imagine your father over there would react if he 
knew how you felt--defensive, remorseful, blaming and 
angry . . .?
CLIENT:
It's funny. He used to seem so huge and powerful; now, I see 
just a pathetic old man. I don't think he's capable of under-
standing, but it doesn't matter anymore. I know the truth.
In this example, therapist interventions supported the client's anger and entitle-
ment to justice and helped her begin to articulate the effects of the abuse and 
hold the perpetrator accountable for harm.
One of the goals here is for clients to develop a more realistic perspective of 
the other. An important step toward this is to elicit the client's understanding of 
the imagined perpetrator's response to such a confrontation. Enacting or imag-
ining the other can elicit clients' empathic resources. This can be particularly 
important when healing attachment relationships is appropriate and important 
for the client. For example, a client may come to understand that one or both 
parents had themselves been victims and would have regretted their behavior 
with respect to the client. In contrast, when healing the attachment relation-
ship is not appropriate, as in the example of Julie, helping clients imagine (and 
perhaps even enacting) the other's response can help them view the other as 
more human and less powerful.
Therapist Operations During IC: Anger Expression in  
Phase 3 of Therapy
The following discussion focuses on specific steps in the model of resolution 
using the IC intervention that occurs during Phase 3 of EFTT (as outlined in 
Chapter 6, Figure 6.1). This section describes interventions that facilitate pro-
cesses in both self and other chairs. Difficulties with resolution, in general, are 
discussed in Chapter 12 in the context of termination. Before anger can be 
expressed assertively, it must be differentiated from other emotions. Thera-
pists must decide which, among the different specific emotional constituents 
a client presents, should be focused on first. At this stage, the client has made 
considerable progress in working through self-related issues (and the mal-
adaptive emotions of fear and shame), but the trauma is not yet resolved. The 
decision to now focus on anger, therefore, is based on verbal and nonverbal 
indicators that anger is the most salient client experience in the moment and 
needs to be fully experienced and expressed. In the context of memory work 
or exploring self-critical process in two-chair enactments (Phase 2), the client 
might have spontaneously expressed anger at a parent for harsh criticism or 
other forms of abuse. This serves as a marker for switching to express that 
anger to the imagined parent in IC. Frequently, however, the therapist's decision 
Resolution of Interpersonal Trauma Through Adaptive Anger 
251
concerns which adaptive emotion--anger or sadness--to focus on when both 
emotions are present and expressed at the same time (e.g., anger mixed with 
tears). This choice is based on previous in-session processes, the individual 
client's history, and treatment goals. Repeated client concerns with issues of 
autonomy, justice, fairness, and respect are indicators for promoting the expres-
sion of adaptive anger. Historical information about the client also informs 
clinical judgment as to whether increasing empowerment or accessing vul-
nerability will be the most transformative. In general, therapists are attuned 
to and focus on the affect and meaning that has been least available or least 
salient (subdominant) in the client's repertoire.
Assuming that anger is the most appropriate emotion to activate, interven-
tions direct the client's attention to microsignals of anger (e.g., "Lots of feelings 
here. For now, let's focus on your anger; stay in touch with that"). If the client 
shifts back to feelings of fear, guilt, shame, or hurt, the therapist again explicitly 
redirects the client's attention to anger. Notice that this oscillation between 
emotions is the client moving "two steps forward and one step back" in the 
sequence described in Figure 3.1 (for empirical research on that pattern, see 
Pascual-Leone, 2009). In the example of Julie, the therapist directly challenged 
the client's fear that she was like her father, and this was enough to help her 
push past her fear. In other instances, a therapist might say, "If you can, let's not 
go there. Try to stay away from your hurt feelings for now; stay with your 
anger," or "So, her criticism really hurts your feelings, but I also hear you saying 
it borders on abuse, is out of line--and that it makes you angry." Assuming the 
client agrees, the therapist would continue to encourage adaptive anger expres-
sion, "Okay, well that's worth saying too! Tell her how angry you are."
Throughout the process, interventions facilitate client enactment or vivid 
experiential memories of the imagined other to evoke anger experience and 
track a client's shifting perceptions of the other (top of Figure 6.1). As clients 
become more self-aware and assertive, they also begin to see the other in a 
different light. The following steps in the IC procedure are characteristic of 
Phase 3 in therapy (as outlined in Figure 6.1).
Promote Expression of Adaptive Anger Toward the Other
Guidelines for promoting anger expression during IC are based on the criteria 
presented earlier in the chapter. Anger is usually first expressed concerning 
the specific damaging actions or behaviors of the other. Moreover, fully and 
quickly activating anger and its associated meaning is only possible when the 
verbal and nonverbal elements of emotional expression are congruent with 
the presenting situation or context. Although therapists need to avoid being 
overly directive and concerned about "appropriate" expression, clients can be 
encouraged to look at the imagined other (or therapist) and to sit up straight, 
with their feet planted firmly on the floor, and speak firmly from the belly 
(not the throat).
In terms of appropriate levels of arousal, traumatic experiences vary in 
severity, and the intensity of associated anger will similarly vary, from rage 
over rape to resentment over invalidation and neglect. Likewise, clients differ 
252 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
in expressive style and their history of emotion regulation problems. For 
clients who tend to be overcontrolled, intensification strategies are useful 
and appropriate, but they are contraindicated for clients with anger control 
problems. Ideally, markers of clients' self-doubt about anger experience can 
be bypassed, but if not, they need to be further processed by returning to 
treatment principles from Phase 2.
Dealing with revenge fantasies can be a problem both for clients who find 
them disturbing and avoid them as well as for clients who perseverate and 
ruminate on them. Clients are encouraged to disclose their revenge fantasies 
to therapists rather than keep them secret but not to dwell on them. For most 
clients, these angry fantasies need to be validated as normal reactions to injustice 
and maltreatment, reframed as unresolved hurt and anger and a desire for 
justice. Next, therapists need to provide reassurance that working through 
and resolving one's trauma will reduce these feelings of tension and the desire 
to hurt the other. It is important to note that in many instances of childhood 
abuse, the offender's behavior was, in fact, criminal, and this also needs to be 
communicated to clients to help validate the severity of the maltreatment and 
entitlement to justice.
The expression of assertive anger should include the use of "I" language 
and the specification of wants, needs, and expectations regarding the other, as 
well as preferred alternative behaviors and articulating the positive effects 
that these would have had. For example, the client might say, "I was your 
daughter. You should have believed me, so I didn't have to spend a lifetime 
second-guessing myself. This would have made such a difference." Healthy 
expression of assertive anger also can involve explicitly setting limits and 
boundaries, particularly in current relationships. This is a central part of pro-
moting a client's sense of entitlement to previously unmet needs, which is an 
essential processing step toward resolution.
Again, the EFTT approach to assertiveness "training" involves gradually 
shaping client behavior through modeling and successive approximations 
rather than by explicit teaching. In the initial activation stage of IC, the client 
should not be concerned about "saying it right." Indeed, such a preoccupation 
can interfere with clients acknowledging the complexity of their feelings.  
As clients are chastising or telling the other off (e.g., "You cared more about 
your bottle and your boyfriends than you did about me, your own daughter!"), 
the therapist should instead promote ownership of anger experience and 
symbolization of meaning (e.g., "Yes, so furious about all the damage she 
caused; tell her more about what makes you so angry"). In this final phase of 
therapy, clients who do not spontaneously shift to more assertive expressions 
can be explicitly directed and coached to do so (e.g., "Try saying 'I hated it when 
you . . .'"). In any case, it is essential that interventions help clients use clear and 
specific anger words. Interventions that hint at or imply anger are not specific 
enough and may tacitly reinforce the inhibition of anger and rumination.
Finally, healthy anger expression requires interventions that promote 
experiencing (see the guidelines in Chapter 5). To that end, it is essential to 
help the client maintain a balance between outward expression and inward 
Resolution of Interpersonal Trauma Through Adaptive Anger 
253
attention to the bodily referents of emotion. Verbal expression should emerge 
from authentic experience (rather than the performativity of scripted, rehearsed, 
or premeditated expressions). Because of the expressive and interactional 
nature of IC, a common pitfall of novice therapists is to neglect the experi-
encing part of this process. Some therapists also get carried away and derailed 
by the drama of anger expression. An effective EFTT therapist looks for con-
gruence between the client's internal experience and outward expression and 
frequently asks the client to "check inside" to ensure that verbal expressions 
still fit with their internal experience. Interventions that help promote anger 
exploration focus on the impact of the other's behavior on the self. This is like 
formulating a victim impact statement but one that also includes affective 
arousal in vivo. Sometimes clients ask whether they could formally prepare 
such a statement for homework or write a letter to the perpetrator (but not 
send it). These exercises can be effective when they are read aloud by the client 
in session, and their experience of doing this is explored. Such in-session expe-
riences typically are quite evocative.
Promote Expression of Unmet Needs
An essential component of meaning exploration is the clear expression of 
unfulfilled needs and expectations in relation to the other. In the case of 
anger, these include the need for autonomy or personal control, to defend 
oneself against threat or harm, and to correct injustices, as well as expecta-
tions concerning fair and respectful treatment from others. These needs are 
motivating and move the process forward. Clients, therefore, are explicitly 
directed to attend to and tell the other what they wanted or needed (or still 
want and need) and did not get. Sometimes expressing unmet needs leaves 
the client feeling vulnerable vis-a-vis the other, particularly when it is a cruel 
or callous perpetrator. In that situation, the client can be pulled out of the 
imaginal enactment and encouraged to explore their unmet needs with the 
therapist. Nonetheless, this includes identifying what was damaging about 
the other's actions toward them, how clients feel they should have been 
treated, and why. For example, the therapist might say to a client, "Instead of 
your rages and criticism and living in constant fear, tell him what you needed 
as a child," or "Tell her how important it would have been if she had actually 
shown some interest in you."
Track Perceptions of Self and Other
Interventions highlight the quality of client expressions toward or regarding 
the imagined other (e.g., "You sound pretty clear," or "It's still not easy to stand 
up to him, is it?"). These client expressions are also markers for eliciting a 
response from the other (e.g., the therapist might ask, "How do you imagine he 
would respond to your demands?"). The quality of this relational process serves 
as a behavioral index of internalized object relations, which evolve as the client 
becomes increasingly able to express authentic feelings and needs. It is essential 
to track these evolving perceptions as indicators of the client's stage in the 
resolution process (see the Degree of Resolution Scale in Appendix C). The 
254 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
purpose of this tracking is for therapists to offer metacognitive reflections about 
the client's process and also as an ongoing assessment of treatment change.
Promote an Increased Sense of Entitlement to Unmet Needs
The goal here is to help a client not only identify unmet needs but also under-
stand the self in terms of legitimate wants and needs. Ultimately, there is a shift 
from client self-doubt (e.g., "Maybe I did something to bring it on?") and the 
sense that their needs are unrealistic or unattainable to a sense of conviction. 
Clients come to believe that, like everyone, they deserve to be treated fairly and 
with respect, to be protected, and to have had a childhood of freedom and 
innocence, regardless of the opinions, behaviors, or limitations of the other 
(e.g., "I may not have been the easiest kid, but I was still just a kid! I needed 
guidance"). Such healthy entitlement helps the client hold the other account-
able (e.g., "You were the adult! You should have provided this regardless!") and 
motivates efforts to get needs met in current life and relationships.
Markers for promoting entitlement are clients' assertive expressions of need 
(e.g., "I needed encouragement, not those constant put-downs") or expecta-
tion from others (e.g., "I deserve to be treated with respect, just like anyone 
else"). Interventions validate these client assertions (e.g., "Yes, of course, all 
people need and deserve this") and then direct them to express these clearly to 
the imagined other. Working with anger in a way that promotes entitlement 
typically includes the use of verbs such as "will," "will not," "insist," and 
"refuse." Once again, it is essential to have clients check whether these expres-
sions fit with their internal experience. If the client is still uncertain about how 
deserving they are, therapy needs to spend more time exploring and working 
this through by exploring the raw experience of an unmet need and what it 
means to be deserving or not. Fully experiencing entitlement to protection, 
dignity, love, care, and so forth (as opposed to superficial self-affirmations) 
strengthens self-confidence and self-esteem.
Support Clients' Emerging New View of Self
As treatment approaches resolution, interventions associated with anger expe-
rience promote and support self-empowerment and gradual separation from 
the other, letting go of unmet needs and expectations. Clients' enmeshment 
with perpetrators is evident in the attention they focus on the other or their 
dwelling on past injustices and offenses. In situations in which there is current 
and ongoing interaction with the other, the client may engage in extra-
ordinary efforts to please these others, have difficulty asserting themselves for 
fear of offending them, or try to force the other to apologize, admit they were 
wrong, or change.
Interventions should first heighten client awareness of enmeshment, victim-
ization, and powerlessness (e.g., "It's like you can never be happy; unless she 
changes, you are doomed!") or exaggerate a client's maladaptive efforts to 
force the other to change (e.g., "Try saying, 'I will force you to apologize;  
I demand that you apologize'," or "Try saying, 'I cannot live until you respect 
me'"). Alternatively, the therapist might role-play the imagined other's response 
Resolution of Interpersonal Trauma Through Adaptive Anger 
255
to promote a client's letting go of unmet needs (e.g., "And so, what if the 
response is like, 'It doesn't matter what you do; you can turn yourself into a 
pretzel, but I will never give you what you want'?"). These are obviously 
paradoxical interventions that can help a client react to the feared outcome in 
concrete ways or perhaps abandon the fruitless hope the other will change. 
Through this kind of enactment or imagining, clients eventually come to see 
that they cannot force the other to change or acknowledge wrongdoing.
Letting go emerges partly from fully experiencing a sense of deserving or 
entitlement to unmet needs in an earlier step. Here, clients no longer feel like 
defenseless children and no longer seek the other's approval to feel good about 
themselves. For instance, one client who was taken from his family, stripped 
of his language and culture, and sexually and physically abused in an "Indian 
residential school" for Indigenous children naturally wanted official recogni-
tion and an apology from the church, government, and individual perpetra-
tors. Partly through the expression of his anger and then validation from the 
therapist, this client began to feel that an apology was owed and deserved, 
even though he may never get one. Many clients also become more aware of 
how important issues of justice and respect are to them and resolve to promote 
these values in their current life. For example, another client who had been 
abused as a child decided to become a lawyer, another volunteered to work for 
Victim Services, and yet another vowed to become a better parent.
Support the Emerging New View of the Other and Relationship
In the early phase of therapy and IC, the other is perceived narrowly and 
negatively--one client viewed her physically abusive and rejecting mother as 
"the devil." However, at this step, people can see the other more realistically, 
partly because their own feelings and needs have been expressed and vali-
dated. Thus, as the client gets closer to resolution, the goal of enacting the 
imagined other shifts. Rather than using the imagined other strictly as a stim-
ulus for evoking feelings in the client, the emphasis now is more on promoting 
experiencing while the client is in the "other" chair. This helps flesh out the 
imagined other's perspectives, feelings, and motives. Ultimately, this process 
draws on clients' capacity for empathy. Therapists can ask clients, for example, 
how they imagine the other would feel "on the inside" or "in their heart," even 
if they cannot imagine the other expressing remorse or directly apologizing. 
Clients develop an increasingly rich understanding of the other and may develop 
an appreciation of the limitations and frailties of those who have mistreated 
them. Whether or not clients feel compassion toward the other, they come to 
see their perpetrators as more human, life-sized, and less powerful.
Importantly, compassion and forgiveness of the other come through acknowl-
edging and expressing legitimate anger and its associated meaning, not through 
denying anger. In the ideal situation, the client might imagine that the other 
regrets and takes responsibility for the harm done (or feels regret but could 
never admit it). In these cases, resolution is more likely to be accompanied by 
forgiveness. As we have discussed, this is particularly true when the other is 
or was a neglectful primary attachment figure with whom the client wishes 
256 
Emotion-Focused Therapy for Complex Trauma
to restore relations. In other instances, clients begin to accept that the other 
will never respond to their feelings and needs--the other does not have what 
is required. Some clients come to perceive the other as mentally ill or pathetic. 
In any case, forgiveness, as we define it, is not excusing or condoning the 
other's behavior, instead clearly and appropriately holding the other account-
able for harm.
End Contact With the Imagined Other and Process the Meaning of 

the IC Experience
These last two steps take place at the end of each IC and are particularly important 
aspects of the final IC and therapy termination. However, it also is essential to 
identify and accept the degree of resolution achieved in each session, whatever 
it is. If issues with the other remain unfinished, clients should be encouraged to 
say so and state their intention to return to the issue in the next session. 
Resolution is a cyclical and reiterative process, so therapists can use the Degree 
of Resolution Scale (Appendix C) to evaluate a client's progress and set process 
goals for the next session.
In this chapter, we reviewed the model of interpersonal trauma resolution 
that is the basis for EFTT. This model specifies experience and expression of 
adaptive emotion as the catalyst for change. We also reviewed the model with 
a particular focus on the role of anger in resolution. The next chapter focuses 
on the role of sadness in resolution.
