12

Sleep and Fatigue in 

Occupational Health 

Psychology Research
Larissa K. Barber and Christopher J. Budnick
Sleep is an important activity that affects how people function in their  
day-to-day lives. Without good sleep, at work we can be emotionally reac-
tive, unfocused, and unable to perform well (Banks & Dinges, 2007; Zohar 
et al., 2005). For this reason, researchers have been building a case for why 
companies should be interested in how employee sleep impacts job behaviors 
due to fatigue (Barnes & Watson, 2019; Mullins et al., 2014). Sleep issues are 
the most influential cause of work fatigue, especially 24 to 48 hours before 
employee work shifts (Dawson & McCulloch, 2005; Techera et al., 2016). Poor 
sleep is implicated in a diverse set of work problems, such as poorer work per-
formance, unsafe work behaviors, lower work engagement, and more inten-
tions to leave the organization (Henderson & Horan, 2021; Litwiller et al., 2017)
In this chapter, we cover sleep and fatigue from an occupational health 
psychology (OHP) perspective with an emphasis on psychological processes 
among employees in field research (for reviews on physiological sleep pro-
cesses, see Carskadon & Dement, 2005; Techera et al., 2016). We first provide 
an overview of common applied assessments of work fatigue and sleep con-
cepts in organizational research. We then examine organizational strategies 
for addressing employee sleep and work fatigue issues, including organiza-
tional risk factors detrimental to sleep managing work fatigue arising from 
poor sleep during nonwork hours. We also discuss considerations for future 
research in each area.
UNDERSTANDING SLEEP AND WORK FATIGUE IN ORGANIZATIONAL 

RESEARCH
Applied research in organizations often emphasizes psychological processes 
when studying work fatigue and sleep from an OHP perspective. This section 
covers common conceptualizations and assessments of work fatigue and sleep, 
as well as the link between them.
Conceptualizing and Assessing Work Fatigue
Work fatigue is important to organizations, as it is one of the top three drivers 
of health care and productivity costs, right behind back/neck pain and depres-
sion (Loeppke et al., 2007). Meta-analysis research also shows higher work 
fatigue is associated with lower job performance in terms of in-role tasks, 
helping others at work, and customer satisfaction (Taris, 2006). It is therefore 
of no surprise that fatigue is a key concept in many occupational stress theo-
ries linking work demands to performance and long-term well-being.
The concept of work fatigue represents a low-energy state of exhaustion or 
tiredness that reduces one's capacity to function well on the job (Frone & 
Tidwell, 2015). As a psychophysiological state, it contains a mix of low phys-
iological energy but also includes a lack of motivational effort (Meijman & 
Mulder, 1998; Zijlstra et al., 2014). In other words, fatigue cannot be solely 
understood as a lack of physical energy or ability to exert effort; it is essen-
tially an emotionally driven psychological state that results in reduced moti-
vation to allocate remaining energy to work goals and tasks (see Hockey, 
2013). This framing is important for applied researchers in OHP because it is 
often practically difficult to disentangle physiological ability for workers to 
exert effort (i.e., what an employee can do) from motivational preferences to 
conserve their energy (i.e., what an employee is willing to do) when observing 
behavioral work outcomes associated with fatigue.
Many researchers conceptualize work fatigue as a short-term stress response 
(i.e., acute strain) arising from work demands, an expected part of the stress 
process that rest and recovery can overcome. However, long-term or chronic 
work fatigue that occurs with prolonged exposure to work demands without 
sufficient recovery is often of concern for long-term employee health and 
well-being (Meijman & Mulder, 1998; Van Dijk & Swaen, 2003). For example, 
meta-analysis research shows that work fatigue is associated with more errors, 
injuries, and physical illness (Techera et al., 2016). A longitudinal research review 
suggests that work fatigue increases sickness absences over time (Sagherian  
et al., 2019) and is central to many poor well-being outcomes associated with 
stress, such as work burnout and depression (Van Dijk & Swaen, 2003).
Work fatigue is assessed with self-report measures that range from general 
experiences of fatigue adapted from state mood or affective well-being measures 
(e.g., Michielsen et al., 2003; van Hooff et al., 2007) to multidimensional 
approaches assessing typical fatigue experiences at the end of the workday (see 
Table 12.1). For example, one measure distinguishes between acute and chronic 
Sleep and Fatigue in Occupational Health Psychology Research 
231
fatigue (Windwood et al., 2005). Another multidimensional approach distin-
guishes between physical, mental, and emotional aspects of extreme tiredness 
and low functional capacity at the end of the workday (Frone & Tidwell, 2015). 
Specifically, work fatigue can manifest as difficulties engaging in physical work 
tasks, problems concentrating on mental tasks, and challenges with managing 
emotions arising from interacting with others at work.
Approaches to conceptualizing and measuring work fatigue often overlap 
with other commonly studied strain concepts in occupational health research. 
One similar concept is the work exhaustion or emotional exhaustion compo-
nents of work burnout. Chronic fatigue or exhaustion is a critical component 
of work burnout, with other work attitudes or beliefs such as low professional 
efficacy and cynicism (Maslach et al., 1996) or disengagement (Demerouti 
et al., 2003) included as a holistic assessment of the work burnout syndrome. 
Yet other burnout measures focus only on general work exhaustion (e.g., 
Kristensen et al., 2005) and multidimensional aspects of exhaustion (phys-
ical, cognitive, and emotional; e.g., Shirom & Melamed, 2006) have stronger 
similarities to work fatigue.
Conceptualizing and Assessing Employee Sleep in Organizational 

Research
Sleep is a complex and dynamic process during which individuals display a 
reversible state of disengagement from their surroundings (Carskadon & 
Dement, 2005). Sleep seems critical for replenishing physiological and cogni-
tive functions needed to regulate how we think, feel, and behave (Barnes, 
TABLE 12.1.
 Work Fatigue Measurement Examples in Occupational Health 
Psychology
General fatigue
Multidimensional fatigue
The Fatigue Assessment Scale
(Michielsen et al., 2003)
* Mentally, I feel exhausted.
* I am bothered by fatigue.
Three-dimensional work fatigue inventory
(Frone & Tidwell, 2015)
* Physical--I feel physically exhausted at the end of the 
workday.
* Mental--I feel mentally worn out at the end of the 
workday.
* Emotional--I want to emotionally shut down at the 
end of the workday.
Single-Item Fatigue Measure
(Van Hooff et al., 2007)
* How fatigued do you 
currently feel?
The occupational fatigue exhaustion/recovery scale
(Winwood et al., 2005)
* Chronic work fatigue--I often feel at the end of my 
rope with work.
* Acute work fatigue--I have plenty of reserve energy 
when I need it.
* Recovery between work periods--I don't get enough 
time between work shifts to recover my energy fully.
Note.
 Examples are not intended to be comprehensive.
232 
Barber and Budnick
2012; Gordon et al., 2017). Ultimately a physiological process, much basic 
sleep research explores sleep "cycles." These include different sleep stages (e.g., 
rapid eye movement) within nightly sleep experiences and aspects of the 
daily sleep/wake cycle (circadian rhythms) that explain alertness variations 
over a 24-hour period (Carskadon & Dement, 2005).
Applied occupational health research, however, often focuses on three key 
sleep proxies used to infer whether individuals experienced a productive or 
replenishing sleep process (see Table 12.2). These include sleep duration 
(sleep quantity), the number of disturbances during sleep (sleep quality), and 
the desire to fall asleep (sleepiness). Popular self-report questionnaires that 
include both sleep-quality (often one item) and sleep-quantity assessments 
(one item and multi-item) are the Karolinska Sleep Diary and the Pittsburgh 
Sleep Quality Index. Sleepiness can be measured with multiple items using 
the Epworth Sleepiness Scale or one item using the Stanford Sleepiness Scale 
(for a review of these and other measures, see Pilcher et al., 2012).
For sleep quality and quantity during nonwork hours, wrist-worn actig-
raphy devices that measure movements are used to assess sleep objectively 
(Sadeh, 2011). Applied researchers have widely adopted actigraphy, as these 
wearable devices can be implemented in field research (see Eatough et al., 
2016) and appear to approximate sleep patterns well compared with the gold 
standard of polysomnography assessment. Polysomnography requires a sleep 
lab to assess multiple physiological sleep indicators such as electrical brain 
wave activity, oxygen levels and breathing, blood pressure, and physical 
movements (for an overview, see Van de Water et al., 2011). The Multiple 
TABLE 12.2.
 Sleep Measurement Examples in Occupational Health Psychology
Sleep quantity
Sleep quality
Sleepiness
Definition
Amount of sleep
Disturbances to sleep
Desire to sleep
Objective 
assessment 
example
Actigraphy Data
(Sadeh, 2011)
Total sleep duration
Actigraphy Data
(Sadeh, 2011)
Sleep efficiency (ratio 
of time asleep 
compared to time 
in bed), number 
and length of sleep 
awakenings
Multiple Sleep 
Latency Test
(Carskadon et al., 
1986)
Sleep laboratory 
assessment using 
polysomnography 
that assesses time 
to fall asleep
Subjective 
assessment 
example
Pittsburgh Sleep 
Quality Index
(Buysse et al., 1989)
How many hours of 
actual sleep do 
you get at night?
Karolinka Sleep Diary
(Akerstedt et al., 1994)
How well did you 
sleep?
Epworth Sleepiness 
Scale
(Johns, 1991)
How likely are you to 
nod off or fall 
asleep in the 
following situations, 
in contrast to 
feeling just tired?
Note.
 Examples are not intended to be comprehensive (for more information, see Pilcher et al., 2012).
Sleep and Fatigue in Occupational Health Psychology Research 
233
Sleep Latency Test is also an objective measure of sleepiness conducted in a 
sleep laboratory using polysomnography (Carskadon et al., 1986).
Meta-analyses of employee samples show that overall (i.e., combining 
objective and subjective assessments) these sleep aspects' different operation-
alizations are rather distinct with low intercorrelations. Sleep quality and 
quantity only have a small but significant relationship (
r 
= 
.16), and sleepiness 
has similar correlations in the negative direction with both sleep quantity and 
quality (Litwiller et al., 2017). Objective and subjective sleep-quantity mea-
sures are also more strongly associated with each other than sleep-quality 
measures (Litwiller et al., 2017).
Of special note, sleepiness is often confused with fatigue given both overlap 
with the colloquial use of the term "tired" (Shen et al., 2006). Yet sleepiness 
captures the subjective experience of drowsiness whereas fatigue represents a 
diminished capacity to exert effort. Although both can certainly co-occur, 
fatigued individuals can recover with periods of rest or relaxation while staying 
awake whereas those who are sleepy need to fulfill a drive to fall asleep. There-
fore, applied researchers must determine whether they are more interested in 
indicators of sleep quantity or quality during workers' previous sleep period(s) 
or their subjective feelings of sleepiness during their waking hours either before 
or during work. The former approach asks about past sleep behaviors whereas 
the latter assesses the current desire to fall asleep.
The Link Between Sleep and Work Fatigue
In occupational health research, sleep is considered a key recovery process 
(Akerstedt et al., 2009; Sonnentag, 2018). The concept of work recovery 
is important for understanding how employees can manage ongoing work 
demands that require sustained effort or exertion. Prolonged exertion on 
physical, mental, and emotional tasks lead to temporary states of fatigue that 
can be reversed with periods of rest. Although many different nonwork activ-
ities can contribute to work recovery (e.g., psychological detachment, physical 
relaxation, leisure activities), sleep is the most critical given it is a basic, phys-
iological drive critical for brain functioning (Sonnentag, 2018). Therefore, better 
sleep can reduce work fatigue through both physiological processes related to 
neurological processing and felt energy needed for motivation.
The sleep-work fatigue link appears consistent across applied sleep measure-
ment strategies, although the relationship's exact strength may somewhat vary 
(Litwiller et al., 2017). Fatigue is more strongly associated with sleep quality 
than sleep quantity, especially when using multi-item rather than single-item 
measures. This may be due to individual sleep need differences that make it 
difficult to use overall sleep duration as a useful proxy for sufficient sleep in 
some research designs. The "8 hours of sleep a day" recommendation is often 
seen as misguided given that there is considerable variation in sleep need that 
can range from 6 to more than 9 hours (Ferrara & De Gennaro, 2001). Daily diary 
method approaches can somewhat circumvent this issue, as deviations in sleep 
duration can be compared to average levels within each person.
234 
Barber and Budnick
Additionally, subjective sleep-quality measures more strongly relate to 
fatigue than objective ones; the reverse is true for sleep quantity (Litwiller 
et al., 2017). However, relatively few studies have objectively measured sleep 
quality and quantity. In fact, most organizational research examining sleep 
and fatigue focuses on self-report sleep-quality measures.
Future Considerations for Studying the Sleep and Fatigue Link in 

Organizations
Current approaches in applied research may benefit from further exploration 
of nuances involved in sleep and fatigue measurement. A few example con-
siderations are noted in this section.
Other Fatigue Conceptualizations
A newer fatigue-related concept in OHP studies, adopted from social psychology 
research, is 
ego depletion
 (or self-control depletion; e.g., Baumeister, 2002). This 
idea describes reduced efforts to engage in acts of self-control (i.e., resisting 
impulses, making decisions, regulating thoughts/emotions/behaviors) following 
initial exertion. Some consider the term 
depletion
 a slight misnomer because 
rest or incentives can reverse this temporary state (Masicampo et al., 2014). 
Researchers have thus argued for the term 
self-regulatory fatigue
 (Evans et al., 
2016), a specific short-term mental fatigue that occurs after exerting self-control 
(Inzlicht et  al., 2014). Indeed, self-regulatory fatigue self-report measures 
include items approximating mental, physical, and emotional fatigue in addition 
to motivation deficits concerning upcoming effortful tasks (also in the general 
fatigue concept, see Meijman & Mulder, 1998). Fatigue and self-regulatory 
fatigue measures are rarely included in the same study to evaluate their distinc-
tions. One exception found that state self-regulatory fatigue was strongly associ-
ated with general state fatigue (
r 
= 
.70) and similarly related to state sleepiness 
and sleep loss (Barber & Budnick, 2015).
Self-regulatory fatigue is still a compelling area of study; it is strongly related 
to poor sleep among employees and is an explanatory mechanism between 
sleep and work behaviors (Barnes et al., 2015; Christian & Ellis, 2011). How-
ever, future work would benefit from distinguishing between work fatigue and 
self-regulatory fatigue at work given that the latter is typically contrasted only 
with negative affect. Negative affect measures lump together low activated states 
with fatigue (e.g., sadness) and even highly activated emotions (e.g., hostility, 
anger). Further differentiating among affective reactions and assessing multi-
dimensional work fatigue aspects (physical, cognitive, and emotional compo-
nents; Frone & Tidwell, 2015) would help establish if self-regulatory fatigue is a 
unique concept and measurement approach in the work fatigue literature.
Other Sleep Conceptualizations
The dual process model of sleep suggests two primary physiological influences 
on sleep behavior and sleepiness (Borbely et al., 2016). Usually, organizational 
sleep researchers draw from the homeostatic process perspective of sleep, which 
Sleep and Fatigue in Occupational Health Psychology Research 
235
assumes sleep pressure (Process S), or the drive to fall asleep, increases 
linearly during the day accompanied by declining energy and functioning. 
Sleep periods are then a restorative process related to this sleep drive, with 
better sleep leading to improved work outcomes due to less fatigue. From this 
perspective, sleep quantity and quality are behavioral proxies for assessing 
this nightly restorative process, and sleepiness most directly measures the 
drive to fall asleep. However, there is a second circadian process of alertness that 
fluctuates over the course of the day (Process C). This perspective suggests that 
our energy and functioning may depend on our position in this cycle. Therefore, 
sleep's impact on fatigue and performance may also depend on a circadian  
mismatch based on the time of day and an individual's sleep/wake cycle.
One approach to examining circadian mismatches is assessing 
chronotype
,  
or individual differences in worker sleep/wake cycle preferences that may 
conflict with the timing of work demands. Early chronotypes (morning types) 
sleep/awaken early and are most alert in the morning, whereas late chrono-
types (evening types) sleep/awaken late and are most alert in the afternoon or 
evening (Kim & Kim, 2020). Most researchers rely on self-report instruments 
to assess chronotypes in field research, as objective approaches involve invasive 
physiological measures of core body temperature or melatonin levels (Baron & 
Reid, 2014). Fortunately, validated self-report questionnaires are also available, 
such as the Morningness-Eveningness Questionnaire and its reduced version 
(the five-item rMEQ amenable to field research), Composite Scale of Morning-
ness, Preference Scale, Munich Chronotype Questionnaire, and the Morningness- 
Eveningness-Stability-Scale (for a review, see Kim & Kim, 2020).
Other Objective Measurement Strategies for Field Research
Objective measures are often prized in organizational and occupational health 
research given the documented limitations of self-report data (Eatough & 
Spector, 2013). However, objective measures are not without disadvantages; 
they can also produce biased information due to issues with training on pro-
cedures, measurement calibration, participant compliance, and participants' 
reactivity to being monitored with devices (Eatough et al., 2016; Ganster 
et al., 2018). Strategies incorporating wrist-worn actigraphy measures are often 
useful for field research given they can be worn for many days and capture 
evening sleep parameters as well as other movements throughout the day 
(Eatough et al., 2016; Sadeh, 2011). Medical-grade devices validated against 
polysomnography in laboratory studies are particularly important, as com-
mercially available options on smartphones or other wearable devices may 
not produce reliable data. It is critical that inferences we make in research 
regarding the distinctions between subjective versus objective measures of 
sleep are not driven by methodological artifacts.
Yet some newer technologies targeting fitness crowds may be promising. 
Recent work compared a commercial smartwatch (Samsung) and a smartring 
(Oura) to a medical-grade actigraphy device (Asgari Mehrabadi, 2020). Although 
the commercial devices performed adequately compared with actigraphy, 
actigraphy was still more accurate (followed by the ring, with the smartwatch 
236 
Barber and Budnick
being lowest). Other work suggests a commercial wrist-worn activity tracker 
(i.e., Fitbit) estimates sleep parameters well compared with polysomnography 
(de Zambotti et al., 2018). Future validation studies comparing commercial to 
medical-grade devices like the actigraph could provide valuable information 
about more commonly available real-time data sources.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY INTERVENTION STRATEGIES FOR SLEEP 

AND WORK FATIGUE
This section reviews key intervention strategies for addressing sleep and work 
fatigue issues in organizations. These strategies may include improving sleep 
by altering aspects of the work environment or mitigating work fatigue after 
sleep problem have already occurred.
Addressing Sleep-Related Organizational Risk Factors
Various aspects of the work environment have a powerful influence on 
employee sleep. Therefore, identifying, targeting, and reducing organizational 
risk factors that affect employee sleep can be a critical primary intervention 
approach to combating sleep-related work fatigue (see Figure  12.1). First, 
organizations can consider reducing work demands--aspects of the work 
environment that require sustained effort in terms of physical, mental, or 
emotional tasks (Bakker & Demerouti, 2017). In addition to leading to work 
fatigue and long-term health and well-being outcomes, many work demands 
are anticipated to also affect sleep through emotional, cognitive, and behav-
ioral processes. For example, work demands can interfere with sleep through 
negative emotional activation (tension, anxiety) and work-related cognitions 
(rumination) in the evening that make it difficult to fall asleep at bedtime 
Primary Intervention Point
Work characteristics affecting sleep
Work demands
Work resources
Work design
Secondary Intervention Point
Coping strategies for poor sleep
Sleep hygiene education
Fatigue management programs
Poor sleep
Work fatigue
FIGURE 12.1. Sleep and Work Fatigue Intervention Approaches
Sleep and Fatigue in Occupational Health Psychology Research 
237
(Sonnentag, 2018). Additionally, some research has implicated behavioral 
processes related to managing time. Workers may "borrow" from sleep time 
during periods of longer work hours given that time is a limited resource (Barnes 
et al., 2012).
Surprisingly, meta-analytic work in organizational studies indicates that 
workload is only modestly, but consistently, associated with poorer sleep-
quality (including sleep disturbances) and sleep-quantity measures (Litwiller 
et al., 2017; Nixon et al., 2011). Focusing on hours worked, however, appears 
to produce different results depending on the sleep measurement approach. 
There is a fairly weak relationship between hours worked and sleep quality, 
but more hours worked does have a moderate relationship with lower sleep 
quantity. However, intervention work in this area does show improvement 
on both sleep indicators using employees from a variety of worksites and 
sectors (i.e., social services, technical services, care and welfare, and call center 
managers/administrators). When reducing work time by 25% while keeping 
pay steady, sleep quality and duration improved 18 months later (Schiller 
et al., 2017). Employees also reported reduced sleepiness, stress, and worries 
or stress at bedtime on workdays.
Work resources may be another critical intervention point for sleep. Work 
resources are generally considered to be motivational aspects of the work 
environment that help people manage work demands. In occupational health 
theories, resources typically include psychosocial factors such as perceived 
control over work time or job autonomy, supervisor support, and fair work 
environments (Bakker & Demerouti, 2017). The mechanisms by which work 
resources might affect sleep would likely differ based on the type of resource 
offered. For example, job autonomy could help employees coordinate work 
around their preferred schedules. Having control over work processes might 
also help employees reduce frustration or work more efficiently, addressing 
negative emotional or cognitive activation issues and work-time interference 
problems mentioned earlier (Barnes et al., 2012; Sonnentag, 2018). Perceived 
control is modestly associated with better sleep quality in meta-analysis 
research, but not sleep quantity (Litwiller et al., 2017). Poor schedule control 
may be especially relevant given that unpredictable schedules (even when 
accounting for shift work) are strongly related to negative sleep-quality indi-
cators (Harknett et al., 2020). Although subsequent research will elucidate 
these relationships further, there is some evidence for control or autonomy 
benefiting employee sleep.
Although social support is also a key work resource that can reduce work 
demands and experiences of strains arising from demands (Viswesvaran et al., 
1999), surprisingly, meta-analysis findings suggest that work support in 
general is unrelated to employees' sleep quality or quantity (Litwiller et al., 
2017). However, the specific types of social support, especially from leaders, may 
be most critical. For example, one intervention used both family-supportive 
supervisor behavior (a more targeted and specific measurement) and per-
sonal control over work time to improve both employee sleep quality and 
quantity (Olson et al., 2015). A similar intervention improved objective and 
238 
Barber and Budnick
subjective sleep duration among information technology workers (Crain 
et  al., 2019). Training leaders on interactional justice--treating employees 
with dignity and respect--also appears to improve employee sleep based on 
intervention work (Greenberg, 2006). Another longitudinal study from Fin-
land suggests that sleep may explain the relationship between organizational 
justice and employee health (Elovainio et al., 2003).
Combining leader influence with specific forms of support has resulted in 
the idea of sleep leadership. Sleep leadership encapsulates supervisor behav-
iors that seek to improve employees' sleep, such as showing concern for healthy 
sleep habits as well as role modeling and discussing effective sleep practices. 
Deployed military members in high-risk occupations show improved sleep 
with sleep leadership even when accounting for general leadership style 
(Gunia et al., 2015). More recently, a large study using actigraph measure-
ments reported that higher employee ratings of family-supportive supervisor 
behavior were unexpectedly associated with shortened objective sleep time, 
but higher sleep leadership did predict less sleep disturbance and sleep-related 
impairment. Alternatively, supervisors' self-ratings of family-supportive super-
visor behaviors did significantly predict better employee sleep hygiene and 
less sleep-related employee impairment (Sianoja et al., 2020).
Work-design or work-organization issues can also be a key organizational 
risk factor for sleep. Most applied studies of work-design issues surrounding 
sleep and fatigue have focused on nonstandard work schedules, especially shift 
work. Sleep problems often arise from circadian issues related to working night 
shifts (i.e., mismatch in typical sleep/wake cycle with daylight) and irregular 
shifts that make it difficult to adhere to a stable sleep schedule (Akerstedt, 
2003). Intervention work in this area suggests a few adjustments to shift-
work characteristics can be effective for reducing sleep issues and fatigue 
(among other negative well-being indicators). These strategies include using 
faster rotations with fewer consecutive days working the night shift, forward 
rotations that move from early shifts followed by later shifts, as well as allowing 
some control over self-scheduling shifts in terms of timing or rest days (Bambra 
et al., 2008).
Last, it is important to consider ethical issues related to both sleep measure-
ment and sleep interventions. Workers may feel coerced into providing personal 
health information that affects their privacy in the workplace (i.e., "paycheck 
vulnerability"; Rose & Pietri, 2002). Therefore, protecting employee confidenti-
ality and choice to participate freely is critical. Additionally, researchers need to 
consider all potential sleep harm risks and side effects in field research, as well as 
maximizing benefits for all employees who participate (Barber, 2017).
Addressing Sleep-Related Fatigue Issues in Organizations
Organizations can also help employees cope with sleep's negative impact on 
work fatigue using fatigue management programs (also known as fatigue 
training or fatigue education). These programs often include a mix of educa-
tional activities about sleep and strategies for minimizing fatigue due to poor 
Sleep and Fatigue in Occupational Health Psychology Research 
239
sleep, which is a secondary intervention point in the sleep and fatigue process 
(see Figure 12.1). They often target occupational settings with some level of 
unavoidable sleep disruption, such as transcontinental flight crews, nurses, 
medical residents, and other positions entailing irregular shifts or demanding 
hours. Meta-analytic results suggest fatigue training improves patient/personal 
safety, acute fatigue ratings, and sleep quality while reducing stress and burnout 
(Barger et al., 2018). Other systematic reviews of these programs show alertness, 
reaction time, sleep knowledge, and error prevention improvements (Redeker 
et al., 2019).
Programs that also include sleep hygiene education represent a primary pre-
vention strategy oriented toward directly addressing poor sleep habits that may 
contribute to sleep problems (i.e., an individual behavior risk factor approach 
to improving sleep rather than the organizational risk approach discussed in 
the prior section). However, secondary prevention strategies that focus on 
managing fatigue arising from poor sleep are also a key component of these 
programs. Common training elements include work environment counter-
measures focused on physical surroundings, napping, and caffeine use.
Creating the right conditions in the work environment can help employees 
manage fatigue. Broadly, organizations might focus on increasing employees' 
arousal levels to facilitate increased alertness when sleepiness or fatigue is 
high. One strategy is adjusting lighting levels. Increasing light intensity during 
night shifts helps individuals match their circadian cycles to the work environ-
ment. However, this approach might also have drawbacks in terms of subse-
quently disrupted sleep, and studies have predominantly focused on shift 
workers (Bonnefond et al., 2004; Hilditch et al., 2016). Noise can also improve 
alertness levels. White noise and pink noise (i.e., static noise) can improve alert-
ness, but too high intensity noise could result in hearing damage or other nega-
tive outcomes (Bonnefond et al., 2004). Both light and noise effects on employee 
alertness are not well understood in field work (Bonnefond et al., 2004; Hilditch 
et al., 2016), thus creating a valuable opportunity for future research.
Providing employees opportunities to nap may also be useful for coping 
with fatigue from poor sleep. Shift workers exhibit better vigilance after a 
shift involving a 20-minute nap, although there were no effects of that nap 
on subjective sleepiness, fatigue, sleep duration, or sleep quality (Purnell et al., 
2002). Yet other work suggests otherwise: medical interns working overnight 
increased their total sleep duration and reduce overall fatigue when on a nap 
schedule compared with a standard schedule (Arora et al., 2006). More recent 
reviews confirm such findings, suggesting that scheduled naps during work 
shifts improved performance and decreased fatigue for shift workers (Martin- 
Gill et al., 2018). Still, most work on naps has focused on shift workers, leaving 
much room for future research on daytime worker fatigue and performance, 
as well as the potential impact of naps on subsequent evening sleep behaviors 
and next-day fatigue.
Last, many fatigue management programs include pharmacological inter-
ventions, or drug use related to stimulants that increase alertness. Such strat-
egies are often fraught with ethical concerns that need to balance individual 
240 
Barber and Budnick
health with relative errors in high-risk occupations, given that many of these 
medications can be habit-forming (Bonnet et al., 2005; Russo, 2007). There-
fore, many programs focus on caffeine use and low-dose patterns that will be 
maximally effective for fatigue without creating future sleep or other health 
issues. Caffeine use can improve alertness and performance even with doses 
as low as 75 to 150 milligrams for well-rested individuals and 200 to 600 mil-
ligrams after one or more nights of sleep loss. Importantly, caffeine is unlikely 
to seriously disrupt sleep if sleep onset occurs 8 or more hours after consump-
tion, although frequent consumption poses the risk of increased tolerance and 
potential withdrawal effects (Bonnet et al., 2005). Meta-analysis research also 
suggests that caffeine buffers against behavioral fatigue among shift workers 
but can also negatively affect subsequent sleep (Temple et al., 2018). Therefore, 
caffeine may be an effective short-term solution that is counter productive for 
improving sleep and fatigue in the long run.
Future Considerations for Addressing Sleep and Fatigue in 

Organizational Research
We have learned much about how to improve sleep from intervention research 
related to organizational risk factors and fatigue management strategies. Other 
examples of exciting future directions we can take based on initial findings are 
discussed in this section.
Technological Aspects of Work-Design Risk Factors
Technological aspects of work design are also producing both nonstandard work 
schedules (unpredictability) and continuous work access (connectivity) with 
important implications for worker sleep. The traditional notion of a work shift 
may be disappearing with more online access to work. Constant access to others 
using electronic communications has facilitated workers' switching between 
work and home tasks quickly throughout the day (Kossek, 2016). In particular, 
using electronic devices to monitor and respond to work communications during 
nonwork hours has important implications for sleep. After-hours work commu-
nications through electronic devices (e.g., smartphones, computers) undermine 
sleep quality (Lanaj et al., 2014; Schieman & Young, 2013), and elicit pressure 
to respond immediately to work-related messages during both work and non-
work hours (Barber & Santuzzi, 2015). Studies point to issues surrounding 
heightened social expectations or norms for connectivity in the organization as 
risk factors that could serve as an intervention point, as well as individual tactics 
that might help protect sleep (Barber & Jenkins, 2014; Barber & Santuzzi, 2015). 
However, we still need intervention work to determine how to address sleep 
issues arising from high work connectivity while balancing electronic communi-
cation's benefits and costs.
Motivational Perspectives on Fatigue Management
Fatigue management strategies, to date, appear to mostly emphasize physical 
work environment factors (e.g., light, temperature) and physiological processes 
Sleep and Fatigue in Occupational Health Psychology Research 
241
(e.g., napping, caffeine). However, psychosocial work environment factors and 
psycho logical processes related to motivation may also be worth investigating. 
Evidence suggests that at least some aspects of fatigue might be motivational 
in nature, especially in nonclinical settings (i.e., no clinical disorders in sleep 
or fatigue). Early laboratory research demonstrated an "incentive effect" with 
respect to sleep and behavioral indicators of fatigue (Haslam, 1983; Horne & 
Pettitt, 1985; Wilkinson, 1964). Even sleep-deprived individuals could com-
pensate for short periods of poor sleep under some environmental reward 
conditions, like better pay or more interesting tasks. A similar pattern in self- 
regulation research indicates incentives can help manage self-regulatory 
fatigue (Masicampo et al., 2014). For example, perceptions of control and 
rewarding work among nurses during a 12-hour shift were more predictive  
of lower levels of fatigue than workload demands or the physical energy 
expended based on an activity monitor (Johnston et al., 2019). Similarly, it is 
worth investigating whether fatigue arising from relatively minor deviations 
in good sleep quantity or quality can be overcome with work environment 
changes that increase interest and attention (e.g., rewarding social interaction 
or meaningful/engaging tasks).
Individual Vulnerability to Fatigue From Poor Sleep
People may differ on their vulnerability to fatigue from sleep issues. Individual 
vulnerabilities to sleep issues and effects on fatigue have also not yet received 
much attention in applied research on sleep in organizations outside of clinical 
sleep disorders and tolerance for shift work (Saksvik et al., 2011). For example, 
some organizational research has targeted sleep apnea treatments to improve 
sleep quality, and subsequently work exhaustion (Carleton & Barling, 2020). 
Cognitive behavior therapy treatments for workers also appear to reduce nega-
tive affect (which includes fatigue), which subsequently predicts both helpful 
and counterproductive behavior at work (Barnes et al., 2017). Additionally, 
research on shift-work tolerance often focuses on demographic factors (age, 
gender) and circadian rhythm factors (morningness/eveningness, rigidity/
flexibility). Yet demographic factors such as age, gender, and marital status 
tend not to be associated with worker sleep issues in applied research overall 
(Litwiller et al., 2017).
Understanding worker preferences about sleep timing (chronotypes) may 
be useful given people with later sleep/wake cycles (i.e., eveningness) report 
more work exhaustion/burnout (Walerian
'
czyk et al., 2020). Yet aside from 
research demonstrating negative effects of circadian mismatches and rotating 
shift work's contribution to shift-work disorder (for a review, see Wickwire 
et al., 2017), less applied research in organizations examines circadian effects 
on nonshift workers' daily fatigue or performance. Still, researchers propose 
that evening chronotypes may struggle with work demands that are outside 
their preferred cycle, often referred to as circadian misalignment (i.e., social 
jetlag or sleep debt; Wittmann et al., 2006). For example, shifts that are 
aligned with employee chronotypes help employees sleep better in terms of 
both quality and quantity (Juda et al., 2013). Other work finds that evening 
242 
Barber and Budnick
types, unstable daily activity and sleep levels, and work habit differences each 
contribute to weekday sleep debt (Goto et al., 2021). Moreover, evening types 
were at an increased risk of sleep and psychological problems during the 
COVID-19 lockdown in Italy compared with morning types (Salfi et al., 2021). 
Thus, poor sleep quantity and quality may impact worker fatigue the most 
when employees are working outside their preferred sleep/wake cycles.
CONCLUSION
Applied organizational research has provided compelling evidence for why 
organizations should be concerned about employee sleep and fatigue--both 
of which have detrimental impacts on employee health and performance. 
Measuring sleep and fatigue in applied research can be challenging, but there 
are promising strategies for exploring these issues in complex and dynamic 
work settings outside of the controlled laboratory environment. Future occupa-
tional health research is needed to tease apart nuances in sleep and fatigue 
conceptualization as well as assessment strategies that can enhance or under-
mine the observed link between them in field studies. Additionally, research 
suggests organizations have major roles to play in reducing sleep and fatigue 
issues among their workers. These roles include intervening on organiza-
tional risk factors that contribute to worker sleep problems, and helping 
employees manage fatigue at work when they inevitably encounter sleep 
issues. We hope to see more applied intervention research in a variety of 
occupational settings (outside of shift work) that tackle work environment 
changes and fatigue management strategies that could help employees sleep 
well and be well.
