3

THE "BIG FOUR" 

OCCUPATIONAL HAZARDS
Now that we’ve explored everyday stresses, pressures, and struggles, we turn to
what we’ll call the Big Four occupational hazards: burnout, compassion fatigue,
secondary traumatic stress, and vicarious traumatization. These occupational
hazards for psychotherapists are the most heavily researched and referenced.
Although they have a good deal in common and sometimes are conflated with
one another or considered interchangeable, they can be considered relatively
distinct experiential phenomena and “syndromes.” Importantly, they are not
diagnostic or clinical phenomena, nor are they synonymous with depression,
anxiety, or even everyday stress, although the experiential overlap is notable
in many ways.
Although all four of these occupational hazards are indeed of great importance, the phenomenon of burnout is given relatively more attention. The
rationale for this focus was based on utilitarian purposes more than anything 
else--that every single psychotherapist regardless of their workplace setting 
or populations they serve is at risk for burnout and that burnout is often 
identified as the most frequent stressful issue affecting therapeutic efficacy 
(e.g., Bearse et al., 2013). However, compassion fatigue, secondary traumatic 
stress, and vicarious traumatization should not be relegated to a status of rela-
tive unimportance. In fact, it is my hope that this chapter's treatment of the Big 
Four occupational hazards prompts further investigation of our own unique sets 
of therapeutic, workplace, and personal circumstances.
What the Big Four represent is what can happen (even) to highly dedi-
cated, hard-working, well-intentioned psychotherapists who
* become emotionally depleted and interpersonally detached and feel a 
decreased sense of accomplishment over time because of an imbalance 
or mismatch between workplace demands and resources of the self (i.e., 
burnout
);
* become more negative, cynical, distressed, and agitated from repeated 
empathic flooding and dissolution of interpersonal boundaries in the pres-
ence of clients' deep suffering (i.e., 
compassion fatigue
);
* experience their own trauma symptomatology from exposure to clients' 
traumatic material (i.e., 
secondary traumatic stress
); and
* take on a mental model of the world that reflects clients' suffering, trauma, 
or hopelessness (i.e., 
vicarious traumatization
).
To what extent were these syndromes discussed in your professional 
training? Would you have become a psychotherapist if you had known that 
40% to 56% of therapists report feeling moderate to high levels of burnout 
(e.g., McCormack et al., 2018)? If these occupational hazards were discussed 
in your trainings and professional development education, what precautions 
do you now take for yourself? Let's unpack each element of the Big Four so that 
we better appreciate what they are and what tends to predict them. More-
over, a nuanced understanding here will assist us for the balance of the book 
as we construct the most appropriate self-care practices and supports based 
on our particular occupational situations.
BURNOUT
As of 2017, there were well over half a million practicing mental health 
professionals in the United States alone (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2017), 
approximately half of whom are likely experiencing moderate to high levels 
The "Big Four" Occupational Hazards * 
47
of burnout (Morse et al., 2012; Simionato & Simpson, 2018). Professional 
burnout, a term first coined in the 1970s (Freudenberger, 1975), is a syn-
drome (Maslach & Jackson, 1981) that involves decreased motivation and 
commitment to your work (i.e., 
emotional exhaustion
), becoming interperson-
ally colder and more detached (i.e., 
depersonalization
), and experiencing a 
depreciated sense of personal achievement and success (
personal accomplish-
ment
). Burnout is not specific to the role of the psychotherapist, but it cer-
tainly is the most common Big Four occupational hazard that we experience.
The factors that can contribute to this trifecta of burnout experience involve 
a relatively insidious set of processes that build over time in which there is a 
mismatch between workplace demands and atmosphere and the therapist's 
resources and needs to meet those demands (e.g., Demerouti et al., 2001). 
Being relatively unaware of these possible tensions increases the chance that 
the symptoms of burnout will feel like they've sideswiped us from nowhere. 
Of the three burnout factors, emotional exhaustion is most common and 
seems more predictive of therapists' intent to quit than the job stress itself 
(see McCormack et al., 2018).
Similar to how one stressful event produces a wide variety of responses 
across different individuals, a work environment could certainly engender 
different experiences for different psychotherapists. For example, in a highly 
demanding group practice in which two therapists started their employment 
around the same time, Jamila, a midcareer therapist, may be feeling stressed 
but able to manage the workload whereas Jeff, an early career therapist, may 
be at his breaking point. There are of course many differences between them, 
but perhaps Jamila purposefully seeks out activities not related to psychology 
and supportive connections after work, while Jeff often does treatment plan-
ning by himself at home because he worries about lack of competence. In 
addition, Jamila may keep a relatively healthy distance between herself and 
her clients, whereas Jeff may feel an acute sense of responsibility for his case-
load, quickly becoming overinvolved and overidentified with them (J. Lee 
et al., 2011).
Research tends to support these portrayals of Jamila and Jeff. Although 
being an earlier career therapist experiencing long hours, difficult clients, 
and piles of administrative tasks predicts multiple facets of burnout, positive  
resources such as maintaining a mindful awareness of needs, interpersonal 
support, and healthy professional boundaries all appear to help protect against 
it (Rupert et al., 2015). We can imagine that Jeff may fare better if he took his 
therapy skills to another group practice with similar caseload demands but 
with a different interpersonal atmosphere. Individuals and workplaces engage 
in a delicate dance, with some workplaces bringing out the "best moves" 
48
 * The Thriving Therapist
in the therapist while other workplaces engender an overload and confusion of 
dance steps that lead to missteps, faltering, and premature resignation of effort.
Potential mismatches between the therapist and the workplace can occur 
within a number of key domains: demand, control, reward, community, fair-
ness, and values (i.e., areas of worklife model; Leiter & Maslach, 1999)
.
Burnout is more likely to occur when the workplace does not provide what a 
given therapist may need at a given time. When these misalignments persist 
and cross a certain threshold for a particular therapist, undue emotional 
exhaustion, interpersonal detachment, and/or feelings of incompetence can 
result (e.g., Maslach et al., 2001). Sometimes, however, a workplace may 
be so egregious, for example in its demands or lack of fairness, that many 
employees will be on a path to burnout, even if they're not fully aware of it 
at the time.
A highly demanding, unrelenting work environment is probably the most 
common way to conceptualize the factors that contribute to burnout. The 
more hours we work, the more likely we'll feel the quintessential emotional  
exhaustion along with a more depersonalized interpersonal dynamic. The more  
our administrative and paperwork demand, the less our sense of personal 
accomplishment coupled with greater emotional exhaustion (see Rupert et al., 
2015). In some ways, workplace demandingness is in the eye of the beholder. 
While some therapists feel that 20 clients per week is their absolute maximum, 
others are negotiating how to scale back a bit from 35. As I've scrolled through 
therapist self-care support forums and spoken with colleagues, it seems that 
when we're given a sort of moral permission from our fellow therapists to cut 
back on our work for the sake of our basic well-being, we more readily take 
action to support ourselves.
How much control you feel you have in your role as a psychotherapist also 
has a strong influence over your burnout risk. Being micromanaged, having 
little influence, and being accountable without any semblance of empower-
ment (Maslach & Leiter, 2005) are all forms of problematic low control in 
the workplace. Being able to exercise some degree of professional autonomy, 
however, is in itself burnout prevention.
When you think about your current job as a psychotherapist, how much 
influence do you perceive you have (and in reality get to have) over deci-
sions that affect the way you work--client number and type, total and flexi-
bility of hours worked, paperwork format, sick days and vacation time, and 
much more? Of course, working for someone else rather than working for 
yourself inherently creates more problems with control. However, companies, 
writ large, are increasingly aware of how lack of employee control can back-
fire and produce a host of negative effects including absenteeism, reduced 
The "Big Four" Occupational Hazards * 
49
organizational commitment, desire to quit, job dissatisfaction, lowered pro-
ductivity, and impaired quality of work (Maslach & Leiter, 2016).
The presence or absence of rewards within our professional world can 
also contribute to burnout risk. "They don't pay me enough for all that I do." 
"No one sees how much I'm doing for this agency." The concept of rewards 
ultimately comes down to recognition of and valuing your worth, whether  
financially, socially, or institutionally. I know of a therapist who used to run  
a prominent program for a large network of mental health clinics. He pain-
stakingly recruited patients into groups, supervised scores of trainees, designed 
new groups, and brought substantial revenue to the business. As these efforts 
continued to go relatively unrecognized year after year, he began to doubt 
whether it was all worth it in the end.
Burnout also feeds on a sense of an unsupportive or disconnected commu-
nity, which can manifest as feelings of isolation, conflict, or disrespect from 
superiors, colleagues, and staff (e.g., Maslach & Leiter, 2005). What are your 
colleagues, supervisors, superiors, and supporting staff like? What is the tacit 
understanding within your workplace about "how to get along" with others? 
If you're in private practice, do you have an office in a suite with fellow health 
care practitioners or you are relatively isolated, never really seeing another 
soul day after day? In one of my previous office locations, I hardly saw or 
spoke to anyone. The sense of community within the small building in which 
my rented office was located was fractured and tacitly tense. Although some 
therapists may tolerate or even be able to ignore this type of atmosphere, 
others may find it uncomfortable or not meeting their needs.
In combination with our sense of job demands, control, rewards, and com-
munity, the principle of fairness cannot be understated. Do you feel decisions 
made on your behalf are morally just? Are workplace policies designed to 
benefit the bottom line or actually to care for the people who make the orga-
nization run, namely you and your colleagues? If you run a solo practice, 
how do your policies and standards for yourself measure up with respect to 
being fair and equitable? Do you grant yourself enough time off or oppor-
tunities to rest and rejuvenate with decent frequency, to diversify your pro-
fessional activities, to reset between clients, to build support networks and 
community? Or does your professional life feel isolating, unrewarding, and 
underdiversified?
Finally, we can consider values as a contributor to burnout risk. Values 
speak to the ideals and motivations that attracted us to this profession more 
generally and to our current jobs more specifically. Identifying with our values 
allows us to better understand why we chose this field and what service we 
want to offer to the world. Values are a hidden magnetic force connecting 
50
 * The Thriving Therapist
therapist and workplace environment. For example, you may expect a sense 
of workplace openness and honesty, but your place of employment may tend 
to keep important policies and guidelines hidden and make excuses for why 
information doesn't flow freely. Your risk for burnout should you stay at that 
job will likely increase. Although not nearly as obvious as a highly demanding 
caseload, misalignments in values can slip under most therapists' radars, thus 
causing undue metalevel stress and disillusionment.
We shouldn't neglect the experience of client crises, which can also spark 
and stoke the fires of burnout (Sim et al., 2016). Cutting across many of the 
burnout domains discussed previously, even a small number of client crises 
demand the vast majority of our time, energy, and emotional resources. We 
lack control in these moments, and crises are often not terribly rewarding.  
It stands to reason that with repeated crises (and without a very helpful 
structure and collegial community of support), burnout and other occupa-
tional hazards are more likely to enter our experience.
It should be noted that the path toward burnout is a probabilistic process. 
As such, we can't assume that the same contributors to burnout will operate 
in the exact same way every time, even for the same therapist across their 
development. Thus, although the areas of the worklife burnout model are 
largely robust and provide a tremendously valuable framework to use in our 
professional lives, it is still up to us (and our support network) to evaluate 
our situation mindfully and to make decisions that reflect our highest good 
and deepest self-caring.
COMPASSION FATIGUE
"In our effort to view the world from the perspective of the suffering we 
suffer" (Figley, 2002, p. 1434). First introduced in the literature by Joinson 
(1992), 
compassion fatigue
 refers to a reduced capacity to feel compassion 
for those we serve and to whom we tend. Figley suggested that exhaustion, 
fatigue, disillusionment, and worthlessness set in over time as a result of  
absorbing so much distress and suffering from others. The unfortunate par-
adox of compassion fatigue may already be evident: The very nature of our 
work can produce the antithesis of the very nature of our work.
Like burnout, compassion fatigue doesn't arise from within a vacuum. 
Unlike burnout, however, compassion fatigue is about our relationship and 
emotional exchange with our clients and the material they present to us. 
Some would suggest that we're humbly asked to
go where it hurts, to enter into places of pain, to share in brokenness, fear, 
confusion, and anguish. Compassion challenges us to cry out with those in 
The "Big Four" Occupational Hazards * 
51
misery, to mourn with those who are lonely, to weep with those in tears. Com-
passion requires us to be weak with the weak, vulnerable with the vulnerable, 
and powerless with the powerless. Compassion means full immersion into the 
condition of being human. (McNeill et al., 1982, p. 4.)
Although this statement is highly poignant, I don't believe that we must "cry 
out with those in misery . . . [and] weep with those in tears" to be compas-
sionate and to offer compassion. In fact, this statement connotes so much 
identification with our clients' suffering that we may indeed fall into their 
lake of misery with them. Rather, I believe that our roles are more meant 
for us to bear witness to our clients' suffering so we're able to throw them a 
life raft of support.
In part through mirror neuron activity, we sense somatically and cogni-
tively what our clients sense (Aubrey & Gentry, 2019). The problem with 
compassion fatigue is not that we can and do empathize with our clients, 
because we're doing this all the time and it is, in part, at the heart of psy-
chotherapy. The potential risk for compassion fatigue lies in what happens 
downstream after we feel our clients' feelings, especially repeated feelings 
of deep suffering and frequently shared narratives of a traumatic past. At 
that point, we risk becoming overly identified and entangled in our clients' 
overwrought nervous systems.
After we have an empathic response to a client's troubling affect or 
material, we have a few choices or secondary response paths (Klimecki &  
Singer, 2012). We can continue to experience empathy without the felt sense 
necessarily bothering us. We can feel sympathy for the client, understanding 
what they're going through without having to feel it so strongly ourselves. We 
can experience and offer compassion, being willing to sit with and desiring to 
relieve the client's suffering. Or we can experience empathic overwhelm and 
personal distress. This last notion of empathic overwhelm may be what the 
literature continues to refer to as compassion fatigue. Figley (2002) even 
noted that (prolonged or intense) empathy is likely at the root of compas-
sion fatigue, prompting Klimecki and Singer (2012) to suggest "empathic 
distress
"
 rather than "compassion fatigue" as the appropriate label for this 
phenomenon.
Empathy, experienced over and over again, client after client, day after 
day, can take its toll. Feeling our clients' feelings and absorbing them rather 
than witnessing them can lead to overidentification and poorer therapeutic 
support than might occur without such empathic absorption. In fact, Kate 
Sheppard, PhD, RN, FNP, PMHNP-BC, FAANP, a clinical associate professor 
of nursing at the University of Arizona, suggested that this emotional over-
absorption should be termed "professional emotional saturation" rather 
than compassion fatigue (as cited in Jablow, 2017). She has observed highly 
52
 * The Thriving Therapist
experienced nurses and physicians who still care deeply and want to make 
a difference in their patients' lives. And yet, their feeling "with" (vs. feeling 
"for") has been tapped out. These practitioners have in essence felt too 
much rather than had come to care too little.
What is commonly thought of as compassion fatigue is inextricably linked 
not only to our perceptions of our clients but also to our histories, emotion- 
based tendencies, sensory sensitivities, sense of responsibility and need for jus-
tice for our clients' welfare, and the depth with which we become immersed in 
our clients' suffering and wish for positive outcomes. Several personal factors 
have been shown to be related to reduced compassion fatigue, including 
mental health professionals' trait emotional intelligence, emotion manage-
ment, and adaptive coping (Zeidner et al., 2013). In addition, research sug-
gests that what contributes most to dysphoria in the helper is the perception 
that the client is suffering (Schulz et al., 2007), even beyond other osten-
sibly powerful factors such as clients' objective disabilities and the volume  
of work the helper faces. Perceptions of suffering in our clients are, in part, 
sourced from how (intensely and personally) we take in, feel, and process  
the emotions that our clients feel. As we'll explore later in the book, we have 
ways to reduce the risk of the fatigue and negativity we face from our clients' 
suffering.
SECONDARY TRAUMATIC STRESS
If we were first responders having to face the trauma of a natural disaster or 
mass shooting, we would certainly be at risk of developing the same trauma 
symptoms as the people directly affected by the traumatic event itself. Bearing 
witness and having close proximity to a traumatic event are well-known risk 
factors for developing posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). But what about 
sitting with traumatized clients, week after week? What about repeatedly 
hearing a client's trauma narrative as you see and feel their tearful and fright-
ened affect?
Through whatever therapeutic approach you're using, you try to help 
clients access their resources, stay within their windows of tolerance, and 
process and resolve whatever traumatic material is causing them suffering. 
Such therapeutic work is not for the faint of heart. Some of us at some 
point will experience trauma symptoms about and as a result of our clients' 
trauma. In a large-scale study of social-work therapists, 15% met criteria for 
diagnosable PTSD as a result of their clients' traumas, and an even greater 
The "Big Four" Occupational Hazards * 
53
percentage experienced at least one major symptom cluster of PTSD (Bride, 
2007). The most common symptom reported by these social workers was 
intrusive thoughts about the client and their trauma, with almost one third 
endorsing this symptom at least occasionally.
Secondary traumatic stress is essentially the spread of PTSD from client to 
therapist (Sodeke-Gregson et al., 2013). Thus, we may begin to feel symp-
toms of traumatic material, such as intrusion, avoidance, alterations in mood 
and cognition, and shifts in arousal and activity level. As you may imagine, 
experiencing such symptomatology while trying to help your clients (as well 
as the client[s] from whom you absorbed the trauma symptoms) is a very 
difficult endeavor. Professional psychotherapeutic support is certainly a 
warranted next step if these symptoms are occurring in your professional 
and personal life.
Having our own trauma history can prime us to absorb our clients' trau-
matic material more readily as our own (e.g., Price, 2001). When we bear 
witness to our clients' revelations about their traumatic pasts, we enter the 
stream of their troubled, unsettled, and hyperaroused system. When our 
stream has been disrupted with our own historical traumatic material as 
well, we may be all the more susceptible to the symptomatology that we're 
trying to help our clients alleviate.
And yet, there is hope. Some research suggests that our perceived coping 
ability can serve as a protective barrier against secondary traumatic stress 
(Follette et al., 1994). Furthermore, psychotherapists with secondary trau-
matic stress can find opportunity within the crisis. The relatively recently 
discovered phenomenon of 
posttraumatic growth
 is a source of positivity 
and possibility even within the most severely traumatized people (Collier,  
2016). Posttraumatic growth is a positive condition that involves finding new 
meaning after hardships, newly viewing ourselves as resilient and capable, 
developing a sense of hope for the future, and valuing relationships in a mean-
ingful manner. With appropriate support from trusted colleagues and loved 
ones as well as our own professional therapeutic assistance, we can transform 
trauma into thriving.
VICARIOUS TRAUMATIZATION
Leandra, a midcareer mental health counselor in a large group practice and 
a mother of two healthy teenage children, is quite emphatic that "life is just 
plain hard and then apparently you die." That wasn't always her philosophy, 
54
 * The Thriving Therapist
however. The last several years wore down her sense of hope, optimism, and 
vitality in her professional as well as her personal life. Although she isn't 
experiencing an obvious type of posttraumatic stress or depression and she 
is living a relatively healthy life, she certainly has experienced a more meta-
level shift in her beliefs about and rules for how life is supposed to work.
Leandra has for many years worked with several adult victims of severe 
childhood abuse and neglect. Many of these clients feel incredibly precious 
to Leandra, and early on in their therapy she considered them part of her 
life. But as the sessions went by, as the therapeutic relationships strength-
ened and as her clients still suffered deeply, Leandra slowly became disil-
lusioned with what life was supposed to offer. "How could parents do that 
to a child?" she would internally scream as her clients revealed layer upon 
layer of emotional abuse, physical aggression, and outright abandonment of 
the child versions of her now-grown clients. Her clients struggled with their 
pasts, presents, and their senses of future, and Leandra was now so tired of 
believing that life was unfair.
Leandra may very well be experiencing what McCann and Pearlman 
(1990) and Pearlman and Saakvitne (1995) called 
vicarious traumatization.
Although it bears some similarities to compassion fatigue (Figley, 2002) 
and to secondary traumatic stress, vicarious traumatization is a syndrome 
characterized by a gradual disruption in a therapist's sense of self, others, 
and the world. Problematic shifts in the schema can be found in the realms 
of safety, trust, intimacy, esteem, and control (Baird & Kracen, 2006). The 
cognitive-emotional lens through which we make sense and meaning out 
of situations and interactions of the past, present, and future can become 
distorted and can cause increased suffering. Some evidence suggests that 
the repeated nature of the exposure to traumatic and difficult material 
and the profound suffering of our clients can alter our foundational belief 
system and the worldview we hold (Schauben & Frazier, 1995). The wily 
thing about vicarious traumatization is that it's insidious, gradual, and quite 
neglected as a potential occupational hazard to be mindful of in our roles 
as psychotherapists.
If we had caught Leandra as she was beginning to experience mild shifts 
in her core schemas, we may have been able to bolster her perceived coping 
capacities, as this factor may be protective against the development of vicar-
ious traumatization (e.g., Painter & Woodside, 2016; C. M. Young, 1999). 
At this point, however, Leandra may need her own professional support, as 
it appears that her experience of vicarious traumatization has permeated 
much of her life. If she were in supervision or one-on-one consultation with 
a trusted mentor, she could work through the professional aspects of the 
The "Big Four" Occupational Hazards * 
55
dynamics within her caseload that lend themselves to an evolution of vicar-
ious traumatization. Together with an effective psychotherapist well versed 
in trauma, her collegial support could help rewire her schemas for greater 
meaningfulness and resilience.
MAKING HOLISTIC SENSE OF OUR UNIQUE OCCUPATIONAL 

HAZARDS
With all of these occupational hazards, we come to appreciate the complex 
and dynamic nature of how the psychotherapist interacts with the environ-
ment to create a spectrum of well-being, struggle, distress, or full-blown 
experiential syndrome. Although we can make general risk predictions about 
"the average" psychotherapist, we need nuanced evaluation for a given thera-
pist's unique life. Even given the most comprehensive research studies, we 
need to evaluate the complex interactions among attachment and adver-
sity history, personality, coping style, career stage, supports, and workplace 
environment to accurately assess risk of and protection from the Big Four. 
Even across these major occupational hazards we find somewhat different 
sets of predictors and triggers. Thus, self-reflection and mindful awareness 
become key to our ability to protect ourselves against the hardship that may 
feel inevitable and to successfully mitigate what has already entered our 
experience.
As we've discussed thus far, the Big Four occupational hazards, together 
with subtle and underacknowledged processes of our psychotherapeutic roles, 
collectively create what we might call 
psychotherapist role vulnerabilities
.  
These can be conceptualized as our cumulative and ever-evolving lived 
experiences that, because of our chosen profession, create unique sources 
and effects of stress. The sources of this stress are not ordinary, and the 
manifestations of this stress can be highly specific. Unlike individuals in 
other professions that may contend with what we all know of as stress, we 
as psycho therapists are uniquely positioned to and tasked with constantly 
caring for, sitting compassionately with, and doing our very best to help alle-
viate deep and palpable suffering in our clients. Can you think of another 
profession that is charged with this awesome power? And with that great 
power comes incredible responsibility for us to preserve and protect our-
selves, as individuals and as a community.
With all of the everyday stressors, strains, and struggles and the unique 
occupational hazards we're up against, it stands to reason that we can be 
deeply and humanistically motivated to take the best care of ourselves and 
56
 * The Thriving Therapist
each other as possible. But this is not where our self-care mandate stops. We 
are indeed beholden to our ethical principles and codes to treat our clients  
with utmost care, respect, and promise. The next chapter thus helps us walk 
through the jungle of our ethical charges and imperatives within our chal-
lenging professional lives. Rather than instill more fear-based guardrails from 
such a discussion, it is my aspiration that we gain a sense of hope as we explore 
how our ethical principles can create abiding motivation to live and work with 
curiosity and honor for ourselves and those we serve.
