9

TRAUMA-INFORMED 

INTERVENTION WITH 

SURVIVORS OF HUMAN 

TRAFFICKING
KELLY KINNISH AND ELIZABETH K. HOPPER
As a result of the complex and often severe psychological impacts of sex and
labor trafficking (see Chapter 8, this volume), mental health intervention is
a significant need for survivors. Current approaches to clinical intervention
with trafficking survivors include utilization of evidence-based treatments
(EBTs) targeting the primary mental health impacts of trafficking (e.g., posttraumatic stress disorder [PTSD], complex posttraumatic stress disorder
[C-PTSD], depression, anxiety, substance use problems, suicidal ideation,
and self-harm) and other evidence-informed or promising practices, often
augmented by a range of adjunctive treatments and strategies to best meet
client needs. Unfortunately, treatment outcome research with trafficking survivors is sparse (O’Brien et al., 2022; although see O’Callaghan et al., 2013;
Robjant et al., 2017), especially with regard to labor trafficking.
A growing body of research suggests that engagement and completion
of treatment with survivors of trafficking, regardless of treatment approach
or type of trafficking experienced, may be especially challenging (Albright
et al., 2020; Barnert et al., 2019; Bath et al., 2020; Ijadi-Maghsoodi et al.,
2018; Mumey et al., 2021; Robitz et al., 2020); thus, survivors are less likely
to receive the very services needed to ameliorate the impacts of trafficking
and other forms of trauma. To achieve effective engagement with trafficking 
survivors, excellence in core clinical skills, utilization of engagement and 
motivational enhancement strategies, and adherence to principles of trauma- 
informed care are essential. Moreover, the complexity of the client history 
and clinical presentation amplifies the importance of skilled trauma- and 
trafficking-informed psychological assessment to guide case conceptual-
ization and treatment planning (Hopper, 2018; Lurie et al., 2020). Finally, 
effective treatments that target primary mental health impacts of trafficking 
and are tailored to the unique needs of trafficking survivors are foundational 
to meaningful trafficking intervention. This chapter reviews engagement, 
assessment, and treatment approaches and highlight recommendations for 
further development in trauma-informed intervention with survivors of human 
trafficking.
ENGAGEMENT AND THE THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE
Engagement of a client in services and the establishment of a therapeutic alli-
ance are among the first goals of mental health treatment (Horvath & Greenberg,  
1994). Numerous studies conducted with trafficking survivors and mental  
health providers have identified an array of challenges and barriers to achiev-
ing these goals.
1
 Survivor shame, stigma regarding mental health care, fear of  
judgment, and cultural barriers feature especially prominently, as well as fears 
of a range of other potential negative and harmful impacts such as reprisals 
from traffickers and consequences of mandated reporting (e.g., criminal justice  
and child welfare involvement, involuntary hospitalization, or deportation; 
Aberdein & Zimmerman, 2015; Albright et al., 2020; Contreras et al., 2017; 
Ijadi-Maghsoodi et al., 2018; Mumey et al., 2021; Powell et al., 2018). Immi-
grants who have experienced trafficking may face unique challenges in access 
and engagement with mental health services, including linguistic barriers,  
stigma and misunderstanding of mental health services, lack of provider 
knowledge related to the individual's and family's cultural beliefs and prac-
tices, disparate worldviews between the individual, their family members, and  
1  
There are many "concrete" logistical or practical barriers (transportation, funding, 
child care, interpretation or translation services) that are not the focus of this chapter. 
However, it is often critically important that mental health providers collaborate 
with other professionals (e.g., case managers, navigators) to ensure a comprehensive 
needs assessment is conducted and collaborative case management services are 
provided to address these barriers (e.g., Gibbs et al., 2015; Hopper, 2017a, 2018). 
See also Chapter 11 of this volume regarding multidisciplinary approaches.
Trauma-Informed Intervention With Survivors of Human Trafficking * 
201
mental health practitioners, and prioritization of stressors related to resettle-
ment (Albright et al., 2020; Ellis et al., 2020). Male survivors may encounter 
gender-related stigma and stereotypes regarding emotional expression, sexual  
orientation, acknowledgement of "victimization," and acceptance of help seek-
ing, while the lack of tailored services creates further barriers to access and 
engagement (National Human Trafficking Training and Technical Assistance 
Center, n.d.).
Many challenges to engagement in mental health care are related to the 
survivor's trafficking experiences, past interpersonal experiences, and, per-
haps most powerfully, current and past negative experiences with mental 
health providers and formal service systems (Barnert et al., 2019; Bath et al., 
2020; Contreras et al., 2017; Ijadi-Maghsoodi et al., 2018; Powell et al., 
2018). In a qualitative interview study with youth who had experienced 
commercial sexual exploitation, Ijadi-Maghsoodi et al. (2018) identified 
fear of judgment or feeling judged as a primary barrier for youth engage-
ment in mental health treatment, as well as perceptions and experiences of 
generally low-quality mental health care (see also Mumey et al., 2021). In  
a systematic review of facilitators and barriers to services, Albright et al.  
(2020) noted that one of the most commonly identified barriers to service 
was "providers' poor interactional approach with patients (e.g., judgmental, 
insensitive, dismissive, not trauma-informed)" (p. 18). Distrust of mental 
health providers is further grounded in past experiences of deception, manip-
ulation, and violation by traffickers and others (caregivers, systems profes-
sionals), as well as prior negative experiences specifically with mental health 
providers such as delays breaches of confidentiality or unexpected and some-
times unexplained termination of the therapeutic relationship (Albright et al., 
2020; Barnert et al., 2019, Bath et al., 2020; Contreras et al., 2017).
Beyond identifying barriers, many of these studies also highlight factors 
that may facilitate engagement, including approaches that emphasize collab-
oration, power sharing and autonomy granting, honoring survival, and rejec-
tion of victim labeling in service delivery. Research into the perspectives on 
health care of commercially sexually exploited girls and young women iden-
tified a core theme of "fierce autonomy," noting that participants' past expe-
riences of coercion and lack of control led them to strongly value autonomy 
regarding health care decision making (Barnert et al., 2019; Godoy et al., 
2020). Sahl and Knoepke (2018) specifically drew from applications of shared- 
decision-making models in other health contexts, incorporating it into service 
delivery with youth who have experienced commercial sexual exploitation 
in order to promote agency, support the therapeutic alliance, respect indi-
vidual preference and competence, and encourage development of autonomy. 
202
 * Kinnish and Hopper
The role of provider knowledge of trafficking and culture- and gender- 
responsive care in facilitating survivor engagement in services has been high-
lighted (Batley et al., 2021; Powell et al., 2018). The importance of cultural 
humility and linguistically and culturally responsive care is especially ampli-
fied in service engagement of survivors of labor trafficking (Owens et al., 
2014). This may include acknowledging different non-Western perspectives 
and worldviews, utilization of language consistent with the person's identity 
(gender, sexual orientation, other aspects of identity relevant to the person), 
consideration of utilization of cultural brokers to enhance communication 
and understanding, and recognizing multiple and intersecting dimensions of 
identity. Especially pivotal to engagement of survivors of human trafficking 
in treatment is the establishment of a collaborative working relationship or 
therapeutic alliance. This involves factors such as empathetic communi-
cation, trust and connection between client and practitioner, agreement 
about the goals and tasks of therapy, and hope and positive expectations 
about treatment. Research suggests that common factors (characteristics 
shared across psychotherapies, also referred to as nonspecific factors) such 
as the therapeutic alliance have a greater influence over outcomes than any 
particular therapy technique (Kidd et al., 2017; Wampold, 2015), underscor-
ing the primacy of these skills in delivering effective services with trafficking 
survivors. Clinician self-awareness and self-care lay an important founda-
tion for the prospect of a stable therapeutic relationship (Corbett-Hone & 
Johnson, 2022). In addition, there are a number of conceptual models and 
treatment approaches that can help support the development of a strong 
therapeutic alliance and encourage self-determination with survivors of traf-
ficking. These include principles of trauma-informed care, the transtheoret-
ical model of behavior change (also known as "stages of change"), harm 
reduction, and motivational interviewing (MI).
Trauma-Informed Care
Survivor experiences of trauma and adversity are often at the heart of both 
the need for mental health treatment and the common reluctance or inability 
to engage in treatment. Meaningful strategies necessary to overcome these 
obstacles are captured especially succinctly by the principles of trauma- 
informed care, a service delivery approach that focuses on an understanding of, 
and responsiveness to, trauma-related impacts (Substance Abuse and Mental  
Health Services Administration, 2014). Specifically, survivor experiences of 
physical and emotional threat, fear, and harm (prior to, while being, and after 
trafficking) are the foundation for the first principle of trauma-informed care, 
Trauma-Informed Intervention With Survivors of Human Trafficking * 
203
establishing physical and psychological 
safety
. Experiences of deception and 
profound violations of trust, by traffickers but also more broadly by others 
who had responsibilities of care and support, elevate the importance of 
trust-
worthiness and transparency
. The multiple and often highly complex strategies 
of coercion and control prior to and while being trafficked accentuate the 
essentiality of 
empowerment
, 
voice
, 
and choice
 and 
collaboration and mutuality
as principles of care. Additionally, incorporation of 
peer support
 serves as a 
powerful instrument against stigma and isolation experienced by survivors. 
Finally, the complex sociocultural and historical factors, especially the multiple 
and intersecting vulnerabilities of gender, sexual orientation, race/ethnicity  
in trafficking vulnerability, mental health impacts, and mental health service 
access, amplify the importance of 
cultural, historical, and gender issues
 in  
trauma-informed mental health care with trafficking survivors.
The Transtheoretical Model of Behavior Change
The transtheoretical model of behavioral change (Prochaska & Norcross, 
2002), also known as the "stages of change" model, can be a beneficial frame-
work for practitioners in understanding change as a complex process and 
in supporting clinician regulation and attunement to the client. It may be 
especially helpful for clinicians who struggle with feelings of frustration, 
worry, and helplessness when engaging with clients who are not ready to 
exit a trafficking situation, who relapse with substance use or other high-risk 
behaviors, or who return to their exploiter multiple times. This approach is 
responsive to survivors in all stages in the change process represented in 
the model, including precontemplation (not considering change), contem-
plation (considering change), preparation (getting ready for action), action 
(active movement toward change), and maintenance (sustaining behavioral 
changes); and it acknowledges relapse as an expected part of the change 
process for many risk behaviors (Lloyd, 2018). This model is grounded in 
the notion that working with a person at their current stage of readiness for 
change will increase engagement and receptiveness to intervention and may 
also enhance outcomes.
Safety and Harm Reduction
Many people impacted by trafficking face significant ongoing threats to 
safety and risk of harm, such as engaging in unsafe sexual practices or 
working in unsafe work environments, using substances that are directly 
harmful or that result in risky or dangerous behavior, leaving placements 
204
 * Kinnish and Hopper
("running away"), and experiencing revictimization (e.g., returning to the 
identified exploiter; engaging in commercial sex to meet basic needs; or being 
targeted by other exploiters due to ongoing risk factors such as homeless-
ness, lack of a supportive caregiving system and environment, immigration- 
related vulnerabilities, mental health symptoms, or substance use disorders). 
Harm reduction is an evidence-based approach that proactively works to 
reduce negative personal and public health impacts of risk behaviors (Logan 
& Marlatt, 2010; Marlatt, 1996). Harm reduction was originally designed 
to address the negative individual and community impacts of alcohol and 
other substance use. One of the key principles of harm reduction in public 
health is a nonjudgmental approach, in which providers acknowledge that 
high-risk behaviors may continue and should not be an impediment to the 
provision of services. Instead, providers offer options for decreasing harms 
and protecting the safety of others (e.g., condoms, needle exchanges, safety 
planning) and provide information and support when ready to change. Con-
sistent with the transtheoretical model of behavior change, harm reduction  
incorporates a range of strategies that meet people "where they are" in their 
change process, potentially creating a pathway to prevention, treatment, and 
recovery services. Harm reduction approaches may be beneficial to reduce 
detriments associated with ongoing sex or labor trafficking and other risk 
behaviors (e.g., substance use, self-injury; Hickle & Hallett, 2016; Pierce, 
2012; Preble, 2018).
Motivational Interviewing
MI (W. R. Miller & Rollnick, 2013) is an evidence-based intervention that is  
highly regarded and widely recommended for work with trafficking survi-
vors (e.g., Gerassi & Esbensen, 2021; Knott et al., 2021). A particular strength  
of MI in working with trafficking survivors is the set of principles ("spirit") 
that values autonomy and self-determination. Instead of applying pressure 
or using other coercive methods to induce change, this collaborative, person- 
centered approach works to identify and explore ambivalence, eliciting and 
strengthening a person's motivation for change in ways that are consistent 
with their values, beliefs, and wishes. This is important in countering the 
loss of power often experienced in conditions of human trafficking. Its utility 
is recognized on several fronts: ambivalence regarding engagement in ser-
vices, broadly, engagement in mental health treatment, specifically, ambiv-
alence regarding leaving a relationship with an identified exploiter, and/or 
cessation of engagement in commercial sex (leaving "the life") or exploit-
ative labor conditions in general, especially in partnership with the "stages of 
change" conceptualization of trafficking described previously (Lloyd, 2018). 
Trauma-Informed Intervention With Survivors of Human Trafficking * 
205
MI has been utilized extensively in substance abuse and addiction treatment 
and, therefore, also has benefit in addressing substance use with trafficking 
survivors.
2
TRAUMA-INFORMED PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT AND 

TREATMENT PLANNING
A hallmark of quality clinical intervention is skilled psychological assessment 
and case conceptualization that drives treatment planning and execution. 
Consistent with a trauma-informed approach, psychological assessment and 
treatment planning with trafficking survivors should be strengths based, col-
laborative, culturally responsive, and led with an emphasis on establishing 
physical and psychological safety (Hopper, 2018).
Unfortunately, survivors often have assessment and treatment planning 
experiences that are not aligned with the principles of trauma-informed 
care. Survivors may be engaged in multiple systems (e.g., criminal justice 
or juvenile justice, immigration, child welfare, health care, and behavioral 
health and psychiatry) with proscriptive practices, contributing to a sense of 
disempowerment and mistrust. For instance, a young person may be sched-
uled for multiple assessments, taken to different treatment providers, and 
moved from placement to placement, without having a say in the treatment 
planning process. This can lead to treatment noncompliance or refusal, 
leaving placement, relapse, and revictimization. Likewise, early emphasis 
on extensive paperwork can be alienating. Instead, early interactions should 
be focused on engagement, identification of internal and external resources, 
and collaboration that enables the person who has experienced trafficking 
to receive some immediate benefit, whether it be information, connection, 
the experience of being heard, a sense of hope, symptom relief, or concrete 
resources (Hopper, 2018; Kerig, 2013). In particular, survivors should be 
involved in setting goals and making decisions about their own treatment to 
the extent possible. Even addressing safety (including legal mandates and 
ethical obligations) should be approached with consideration of relational 
impacts, utilizing trauma-informed safety assessment and planning strate-
gies that best preserve and even enhance engagement. A social-ecological 
framework is beneficial in assessment and treatment planning because of 
2  
A note of caution: The parallels of the utility of "stages of change" harm reduction 
and MI with substance use do not extend to conceptualization of engagement 
in commercial sex as a form of "sex addiction." Such a mischaracterization is 
potentially quite harmful to survivors.
206
 * Kinnish and Hopper
its emphasis on the person in context, leading to recommendations for the 
individual and also addressing relationships with peers, families, and com-
munities (Hopper, 2017a).
Core components of psychological assessment with trafficking survivors 
include rapport building and informed consent, a clinical interview with the 
survivor (and caregiver, if the survivor is a minor and there is an identified 
supportive caregiver available) and standardized measures to obtain a full 
picture of client history and vulnerability factors, trauma history, and traf-
ficking experiences (including elements of force, fraud, and coercion), as 
well as an understanding of basic needs and safety, psychological symptoms 
and diagnoses, and client strengths and coping. Because of the breadth and 
complexity of emotional and behavioral impacts, standardized broadband 
and trauma-specific instruments are especially important in psychological 
assessment. In addition, screening and assessment of substance use, suicidal 
ideation, and self-injury are also crucial given the strong presence of these 
concerns among survivors (Hopper, 2018; Moore et al., 2020). Assessment 
of cognitive-developmental functioning may also be beneficial, due to the 
associated exploitation risk (Nichols & Heil, 2022; Reid, 2018; Reid et al., 
2018) and relevance for treatment planning.
Beyond its primary function of information gathering, psychological assess-
ment conducted by a skilled clinician can facilitate client engagement and 
alliance building. A positive experience of talking with someone about their 
experiences and emotions can relieve the burden of secrecy, decrease shame, 
and instill hope. Survivors may then be less fearful of mental health care and 
more open to further intervention. Opportunistic incorporation of psycho-
education (deriving from the survivor's focus, needs, and interests) transfers 
knowledge to the survivor and demonstrates possible utility of mental health 
treatment. As part of the assessment process, education about trauma can 
normalize and destigmatize many mental health "symptoms," framing these 
as psychological, biological, and behavioral coping responses to repeated or 
chronic trauma (Herman, 1997; van der Kolk, 1994). Opportunities to build 
regulatory capacities may also be incorporated, including education about 
regulation and teaching and practice of basic regulatory skills (Hopper, 2018). 
Careful attention to pacing, drawing on therapist attunement and coregulation 
skills, is important throughout the assessment.
As articulated previously, it is essential that the assessment is appropri-
ately paced, with engagement and relational impacts prioritized over assess-
ment completion objectives. A completed assessment is of no benefit if the 
client disengages from treatment or continues to attend but no longer trusts 
the therapist or believes treatment can be of benefit. As much as organi-
zational requirements will allow, it is often helpful to conduct assessment 
Trauma-Informed Intervention With Survivors of Human Trafficking * 
207
over multiple sessions with strategies embedded to enhance the therapeutic 
relationship and build regulatory capacities, titrating assessment tasks with 
careful attunement to client regulation and the strength of the therapeutic 
relationship.
TREATMENT APPROACHES WITH SURVIVORS OF TRAFFICKING
The American Psychological Association Presidential Task Force on Evidence- 
Based Practice (2006) defined 
evidence-based practice
 as "the integration of 
the best available research with clinical expertise in the context of patient 
characteristics, culture and preferences." This amplifies the importance of 
research, clinician's skills, as well as individualized culturally responsive care 
and client empowerment, voice, and choice, consistent with principles of 
trauma-informed care, in treatment delivery. An 
evidence-based treatment
 is  
an intervention proven in a field of research as effective in treating a particular 
disorder, symptom, or problem in a specific population and is generally con-
sidered the gold standard of clinical care. Trafficking survivors are deserving 
of the best care available, utilizing treatment approaches with the strongest 
evidence of their effectiveness at ameliorating the specific symptoms and dif-
ficulties that survivors experience. Unfortunately, there is a limited body of 
empirical treatment outcome research conducted with trafficking survivors. 
There are, however, EBTs for analogous or overlapping populations (e.g., 
sexual abuse and domestic violence survivors) that address common psycho-
logical impacts and mental health concerns experienced by trafficking sur-
vivors. These are potentially important intervention tools for people impacted 
by trafficking and exploitation (O'Brien et al., 2022; Salami et al., 2018). 
In addition, an array of "promising practices" and adjunctive interventions 
may also offer benefit to survivors. Due to the prevalence of traumatic expe-
riences and high rates of PTSD, C-PTSD, and other trauma-related impacts, 
trauma-focused treatments are especially prioritized in trafficking response 
(Powell et al., 2018), and trauma treatments with an evidence base, specif-
ically with trafficking survivors, are described first here.
Trauma-Focused Treatments
Trauma-focused treatments address the effects of traumatic experiences and 
have as their goal the amelioration of trauma-related symptoms. They typically 
involve some combination of establishing physical and psychological safety, 
building regulatory capacities, learning about trauma, addressing relational 
208
 * Kinnish and Hopper
impacts, and direct processing of the traumatic experiences through cognitive, 
exposure-based, and/or narrative strategies.
Trauma-Focused EBTs With Trafficking-Related Outcome Research
Trauma-focused cognitive behavioral therapy (TF-CBT; Cohen et al., 2017) 
is an EBT for children and adolescents impacted by trauma. It uses a phase-
based approach that includes safety, psychoeducation, coping skills, cog-
nitive processing, and gradual exposure in a trauma narration phase, as 
well as a strong emphasis on caregiving and support (for parents and/or 
other supportive adults). TF-CBT has been used with trafficked children in 
an array of settings globally. In a randomized controlled trial (O'Callaghan 
et al., 2013), 52 girls recovered from a brothel in the Democratic Republic 
of Congo were assigned to TF-CBT or a waitlist control group. The TF-CBT 
treatment was delivered in a 15-session culturally modified group format by 
nonclinical lay facilitators. There was a significant reduction in posttraumatic  
stress (PTS) symptom scores for youth in TF-CBT treatment compared with 
the waitlist control group. There were also significant improvements in 
symptoms of depression, anxiety, conduct problems, and prosocial behavior 
in the TF-CBT group. In a contemporaneous study with former child soldiers in  
the Democratic Republic of Congo (McMullen et al., 2013), boys in the 
TF-CBT group treatment similarly reported significant reductions in PTS 
symptoms compared with the waitlist control group, as well as improvements 
in depression, anxiety, conduct problems, psychosocial distress, and pro social 
behavior. In both studies, effects were sustained at 3-month follow-up. TF-CBT 
has also been successfully implemented with trafficked girls in Cambodia 
(Bass et al., 2011), Haiti (Wang et al., 2016), and the United States (Kinnish 
et al., 2020). TF-CBT treatment applications have been developed specifically 
for minors who have experienced commercial sexual exploitation, with spe-
cialized training and an implementation guide available for clinicians certified  
in TF-CBT (Kinnish et al., 2020, 2021).
Narrative exposure therapy (NET; Schauer et al., 2011) is a trauma-focused  
EBT that has been found to be effective at reducing trauma symptoms in 
both adult and minor survivors of human trafficking (Brady et al., 2021; Ertl  
et al., 2011; Robjant et al., 2017, 2019). NET is a short-term EBT developed 
specifically for individuals who have experienced multiple traumas, often in  
complex sociopolitical and cultural contexts. It involves development of a 
life narrative with a focus on traumatic experiences and associated thoughts, 
feelings, and sensory experiences, actively guided by a therapist toward 
reprocessing and integration. In a study of child soldiers in Uganda, children 
were randomly assigned to NET, an academic catch-up program, or waitlist 
Trauma-Informed Intervention With Survivors of Human Trafficking * 
209
control. Those receiving NET experienced reduced trauma symptoms com-
pared with the other conditions (Ertl et al., 2011). Robjant et al. (2017) 
reported significant improvement in PTS symptoms pre- and posttreatment, 
which were sustained at 3-month follow-up, in a small sample (
N
=
 10) of 
sex-trafficked women. All participants reported clinically meaningful change, 
with symptom scores in the severe range pretest and in the mild or moderate 
range posttest and at follow-up. In a more recent randomized clinical trial 
feasibility study, Brady et al. (2021) similarly reported significant reductions 
in PTS symptoms or PTSD, depression, and anxiety in a mixed sample of 
survivors of sex and labor trafficking.
Cognitive processing therapy (CPT; Resick et al., 2016) is an EBT for adults 
and youth that aids clients in identifying beliefs and thought processes that 
interfere with posttraumatic recovery. Clients learn to identify their "stuck 
points" (negative thoughts created to deal with trauma) and consider more 
balanced perspectives. A feasibility study was conducted of modified group  
CPT with 10 adolescent survivors of commercial sexual exploitation in 
Cambodia. Participants in the pilot study reported high satisfaction and atten-
dance, as well as reductions in PTS and depression symptoms posttreatment 
and at 3-month follow-up, with no incidents of suicidal behavior or non-
suicidal self-injury during the group or at follow-up (Clemans et al., 2021).
Trauma-Focused EBTs for PTSD
Current gold standard treatments for adults with PTSD include CPT (Resick 
et al., 2016), cognitive therapy (Beck, 2005), eye movement desensitization 
and reprocessing (EMDR; Shapiro, 2018), individual cognitive behavioral 
therapy (CBT) with a trauma focus (Monson & Shnaider, 2014), and pro-
longed exposure (PE; Foa et al., 2007; International Society for Traumatic 
Stress Studies, 2018c). The most strongly recommended EBTs for children 
and adolescents with PTSD are CBT with a trauma focus (with caregiver and 
child or with child alone) and EMDR (International Society for Traumatic 
Stress Studies, 2018c). These approaches all have a substantial evidence base 
and have been utilized effectively with adults and youth in a range of treat-
ment settings and locales and with individuals with an array of trauma expe-
riences, including trauma exposures that may overlap with the experiences 
of trafficking survivors (e.g., Edmond, 2018; Foa et al., 2013; LoSavio et al., 
2021; Rodenburg et al., 2009); however, outcome research specifically with 
trafficking survivors is lacking for these approaches. Their value and specific 
cautions in implementation with trafficking survivors have been thoughtfully 
reviewed elsewhere (Salami et al., 2018; see also O'Brien et al., 2022). Specific 
concerns identified include the limitations of exposure-based interventions 
210
 * Kinnish and Hopper
to address stigma and shame, potential poorer retention of PE compared 
with CPT, and impacts of low literacy for CPT (ameliorated by the omission 
of a written trauma account in CPT-C [cognitive therapy only]). Challenges 
of impaired recall and concerns regarding dissociative responses when expo-
sure is not preceded by skillful preparation (including grounding, mindful-
ness, or other coping and regulation skills) were also identified. If exposure 
is not sufficiently supported, modulated, or titrated, there may also be risk of 
harm associated with unsafe behaviors (e.g., substance use, running away) 
that are attempts to cope with dysregulation elicited by trauma reminders.
Dialectical behavioral therapy (DBT; Linehan, 1993) is another EBT 
that may be especially helpful in treatment with trafficking survivors. DBT 
is a cognitive behavioral therapy originally developed to address suicidal  
ideation in individuals diagnosed with borderline personality disorder, and 
not designed as a trauma-focused treatment; however, protocols have been 
developed to address trauma (see DBT-PTSD [Bohus et al., 2013] and DBT-PE 
[Harned, 2022]). DBT has also been adapted to be more developmentally 
appropriate for adolescents who struggle with emotional dysregulation and 
self-harm (A. L. Miller et al., 2007). It is of high potential value with trafficking 
survivors due to its effectiveness in reducing suicidal ideation and self-harm, 
and enhancing coping, regulation, and interpersonal effectiveness (McCauley 
et al., 2018), all of which are prioritized concerns with trafficking survivors.
C-PTSD Treatments
As described in the previous chapter, early research has identified a high 
incidence of C-PTSD symptoms in survivors of human trafficking. Based on 
evidence supporting the 
International Classification of Diseases 11th
Revi-
sion
 (
ICD-11
; World Health Organization, n.d.) distinction between PTSD 
and C-PTSD (Brewin et al., 2017; see Chapter 8, this volume), there are 
limitations to the direct application of existing outcome literature on PTSD 
to trauma survivors with C-PTSD (Karatzias et al., 2019), including traf-
ficking survivors who have C-PTSD. A key feature of C-PTSD treatment is 
a phase-based approach that includes a sequence of stabilization and skills 
building, followed by trauma processing, and concluding with consolida-
tion of treatment gains and integration into everyday life (Cloitre et al., 
2012). Trafficking survivors with C-PTSD may benefit from multicomponent 
treatments delivered in a phased approach that directly address the core 
impacts of C-PTSD, including affect dysregulation, negative self-concept,  
and disturbances in relationships (Hopper, 2017a). Early emphasis in treat-
ment on development of coping and regulation skills is likely to be especially 
important for trafficking survivors, many of whom continue to live under  
Trauma-Informed Intervention With Survivors of Human Trafficking * 
211
conditions of chronic stress even after exiting trafficking. Treatment for C-PTSD 
is also likely to be lengthier than for PTSD due to the need for stabilization 
work involving the development of safety, a strong treatment alliance, and 
emotional regulation skills, as well as the need to address a greater number 
of trauma experiences and symptoms (International Society for Traumatic 
Stress Studies, 2018a, 2018b). In fact, the need for greater length and/or 
frequency of treatment with trafficking survivors is commonly noted in the 
literature (Cohen, Mannarino, & Kinnish, 2017; Judge et al., 2018; Kinnish 
et al., 2020; Ottisova et al., 2018). In a study comparing the electronic 
health records of trafficked compared with nontrafficked youth in mental 
health services in England, treatment length was 56% greater for youth who 
had experienced trafficking (Ottisova et al., 2018).
Evidence-informed treatments targeting C-PTSD are of significant poten-
tial benefit to this population. For instance, treatment outcome studies on 
interventions such as skills training in affective and interpersonal regulation/ 
narrative therapy (STAIR-NT; Cloitre et al., 2002) have included both partici-
pants with PTSD and C-PTSD. STAIR actively targets C-PTSD impacts, includ-
ing affective regulation skills, interpersonal functioning, and self-efficacy and 
can be combined with trauma processing interventions (narrative therapy or 
others) that target the core symptoms of PTSD. Narrative exposure therapy 
(described previously) has been utilized with trauma survivors with poly-
traumatization and has protocols for dissociation, a common C-PTSD symptom  
(Chessell et al., 2019).
Regarding C-PTSD approaches with children and adolescents, the attach-
ment, regulation, and competency (ARC) framework (Blaustein & Kinniburgh, 
2018) has shown significant reductions in social, emotional, and behavioral out-
comes for complex trauma-impacted youth in community-based (Fehrenbach  
et al., 2021) and residential (Hodgdon et al., 2013) settings. Preliminary out-
come data on the integrative treatment of complex trauma for adolescents 
approach have likewise shown promising impacts on socially marginalized, 
multiply traumatized children and adolescents (Briere & Lanktree, 2013). 
Systematic efforts to tailor these models and evaluate their effectiveness with 
trafficking survivors are a clear priority.
Although TF-CBT (described earlier) was not initially developed as a 
treatment targeting C-PTSD, C-PTSD applications have been developed for 
TF-CBT that incorporate the identified core features of C-PTSD intervention, 
specifically a phased-based approach prioritizing safety, stabilization and 
skills building and greater length of treatment, among other enhancements 
(Cohen et al., 2012; Kliethermes & Wamser, 2012). In a study utilizing these 
C-PTSD modifications, youth in foster care and at high risk of placement 
212
 * Kinnish and Hopper
disruption showed significantly greater improvement in emotional and 
behavioral problems and PTSD symptoms as well as less placement disrup-
tion and running away compared with treatment as usual (Weiner et al., 
2009). Even unmodified TF-CBT has demonstrated effectiveness addressing 
core symptoms of reexperiencing, avoidance, and sense of threat with youth 
diagnosed with C-PTSD comparable to its impacts with PTSD-diagnosed 
youth, as well improvements in emotional regulation, self-concept, and inter-
personal problems (Sachser et al., 2017).
Adjunctive Interventions
Many existing therapeutic programs for trafficking survivors integrate a 
range of adjunctive treatments, including practices as varied as mindful-
ness, yoga, and expressive arts interventions. A growing body of literature 
suggests the value of experiential therapies to build and promote better 
regulatory capacities, emotional expression and communication, increased 
self-awareness, and improved self-concept with survivors of trafficking 
(Hopper et al., 2018; Namy et al., 2022; Sanar Wellness Institute and Polaris 
Project, 2015).
Mind-body interventions (e.g., meditation, visualization/guided imagery, 
breathing techniques, and body-based therapies) have been found to impact 
trauma-related symptoms (Gene-Cos et al., 2016; Gordon et al., 2008; 
Wahbeh et al., 2014; Warner et al., 2014) and should be further explored 
as adjunctive treatments for trafficking survivors. For instance, mindfulness 
(e.g., mindfulness-based stress reduction) has been shown to decrease symp-
toms of PTS and depression in survivors of interpersonal violence (Boyd 
et al., 2018; Follette et al., 2015; Kelly & Garland, 2016; Ortiz & Sibinga, 
2017) and has been explored for trafficking survivors (McCaw, 2019). Yoga 
has gained increasing attention as an intervention for trauma (van der Kolk 
et al., 2014), and a pilot study of yoga with adult women who had experienced 
sex trafficking in Uganda showed reductions in symptoms of depression and 
improvements in self-rated emotional and physical health. This method was 
suggested as viable within low-resource settings such as shelters (Namy et al., 
2022). Mind-body interventions may be utilized independently or incorpo-
rated into EBTs to facilitate development of coping and regulation skills.
Expressive arts interventions (e.g., visual arts, music, journaling and 
poetry, dance or movement) are commonly used with trafficking survivors. 
Current evidence regarding application of these approaches for trafficking 
survivors primarily involves case studies and small qualitative investigations 
(Schrader & Wendland, 2012; Tan, 2012). A qualitative study of therapists 
Trauma-Informed Intervention With Survivors of Human Trafficking * 
213
incorporating expressive arts interventions with adult survivors of commer-
cial sexual exploitation found that these modalities allow a strengths-based, 
client-centered approach with a range of benefits, including establishment of 
the therapeutic alliance, installation of hope, connection to others, trauma 
exploration, release of emotions, and development of identity and self (Lee, 
2019). Hopper et al. (2018) described the positive impacts of an experien-
tial group intervention that incorporated theater games or expressive arts 
activities to address C-PTSD in a sample of sex-trafficked women and girls. In 
qualitative analyses, participants reported impacts of the group in the areas 
of trust and relationships, regulation, self-awareness, and future orientation. 
Trauma-focused or trauma-informed experiential interventions are of signifi-
cant potential benefit, especially as braided or sequenced with EBTs.
Treatment for Substance Use Problems and Other Comorbid Conditions
Due to the high rates of substance use and intersecting trauma among traf-
ficking survivors, integrated trauma and substance use treatments are essential 
in trafficking response. Unfortunately, there are few EBTs that target trauma 
and substance abuse and no outcome studies conducted with trafficking  
survivors. Seeking safety (Najavits, 2002) is especially highly regarded for its 
evidence base and concurrent focus on trauma and substance use (National 
Human Trafficking Training and Technical Assistance Center, 2021). It has 
both adult and youth applications, can be delivered in individual and group 
formats, uses professional and lay facilitators, and is flexible and adaptive, 
with 25 possible modules that can be delivered in any order. Risk reduction 
through family therapy (RRFT; Danielson et al., 2010, 2020) is a model of 
particular relevance for intervention with adolescents in that it addresses 
both trauma and substance use and includes components to address family 
communication, risky sexual behaviors, cognitive coping and trauma-specific 
cognitive processing, all of which are prioritized needs of trafficked youth. 
These interventions may be used in conjunction with other treatment modal-
ities targeting substance use, including other cognitive behavioral interventions, 
12-step programming, and medication-assisted therapy (Hopper, 2017b). It 
is noted that, in addition to the treatment engagement challenges previously 
outlined, there are specific barriers related to substance use intervention, 
especially requirements of complete abstinence from substance use in order 
to access services (Gerassi, 2018).
Although EBTs for trauma broadly target associated symptoms such as 
trauma-related anxiety and depression, trafficking survivors may have pri-
mary diagnoses other than PTSD or comorbid conditions that require addi-
tional treatment (Cary et al., 2016; Oram et al., 2015; Stoklosa et al., 2017). 
214
 * Kinnish and Hopper
Given the range, heterogeneity, and comorbidity among trafficking survi-
vors, common elements and transdiagnostic approaches may have partic-
ular value. For example, modular approaches to therapy for children with 
anxiety, depression, trauma, and conduct problems (MATCH-ADTC; Chorpita 
& Weisz, 2009) may have utility with trafficked youth. The common elements 
treatment approach (CETA) likewise targets the common impacts of PTSD,  
depression, anxiety, and substance use and has the added advantage of 
application in low-resource settings and successful utilization with non-
professionals (Murray et al., 2014, 2018).
Serious mental illness includes primary depressive disorders that persist 
following trauma treatment, bipolar disorder, or disorders that produce psy-
chotic symptoms such as schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. For traf-
ficking survivors whose symptom picture is further complicated by serious 
mental illness, treatment planning should also include interventions specific 
to these conditions, including therapy as well as consideration of psycho-
pharmacological intervention (Cary et al., 2016; Oram et al., 2015).
Group Interventions
At least in part because of the shame, stigma, and isolation they often expe-
rience, group treatments may be especially beneficial for trafficking sur-
vivors (McMullen et al., 2013; O'Callaghan et al., 2013; Usacheva et al., 
2022). Groups may serve psychoeducational, psychotherapeutic, and support  
functions and may create a motivating factor to remain in treatment and 
prevent return to the trafficker (Countryman-Roswurm & Bolin, 2014; 
Hickle & Roe-Sepowitz, 2014; Kenny et al., 2018). Ending the Game(tm) is 
a group intervention that targets shame, isolation, regulation of emotion 
and behavior, maladaptive cognitions, identity disturbance, and dissociation 
and has demonstrated positive trends in improving regulation, relational 
capacity, sense of self, and future orientation (Usacheva et al., 2022). The 
STARS experiential group (previously described) was similarly developed 
specifically for trafficking survivors, targeting complex trauma impacts and 
utilizing experiential strategies (Hopper et al., 2018). EBTs may also be 
delivered in a group format. For instance, the TF-CBT treatment in the pre-
viously described RCTs (McMullen et al., 2013; O'Callaghan et al., 2013) 
were delivered in a group setting. Moreover, the skills training component of 
DBT is often, and perhaps preferentially with trafficking survivors, delivered 
in a group setting. Group treatments may also address resource challenges 
in low-resource settings.
Trauma-Informed Intervention With Survivors of Human Trafficking * 
215
Relationship Development and Community Reintegration
Interpersonal connections are often central to the recovery of human traffick-
ing survivors. Intervention should incorporate opportunities to establish or 
reestablish healthy supportive relationships and connection with family, close 
relationships, and community, if and when it is safe to do so (Brunovskis & 
Surtees, 2013).
Family Engagement and Intervention
As previously discussed, many trafficking survivors come from complex family 
environments marked by financial stress, violence, abuse, or neglect, sub-
stance use, and/or chronic stress which may have directly contributed to 
trafficking victimization. Therefore, family attitudes regarding the victim-
ization vary widely. Responses may range from active support of the survivor 
to lack of awareness of the exploitation, disengagement or helplessness to 
intervene, blaming the survivor, or even active support of, or direct involve-
ment in, the trafficking. Family and caregiver perspectives that may con-
tribute to shame and stigma are especially important considerations for this 
population (Cohen, Mannarino, & Kinnish, 2017; Kiss et al., 2015).
For trafficked youth, involvement of a safe and supportive caregiver can 
be particularly pivotal. Engagement of caregivers is highly individualized and 
considers survivors' pre-trafficking circumstances, features of the relation-
ship that contributed to trafficking vulnerability, specific trafficking experi-
ences, as well as, and perhaps most importantly, the caregiver(s) current 
functioning. When considering family engagement, it is important to note 
that "caregivers" may include members of the family of origin, a new care-
giving relationship, a close mentoring relationship, or adults within formal 
caregiving systems (foster parents, congregate care staff). Intervention can 
include caregiver education and support, individual counseling for caregivers, 
and dyadic or family therapy. Many of the therapies described earlier include 
one or more of these elements (e.g., TF-CBT, ARC, RRFT).
Parenting Support
Trauma-related impacts on survivors' parenting of their own children can 
include lack of confidence in parenting abilities, overprotective parenting and 
avoidance of socialization with other children or adults, and emotional dis-
connection from children when the caregiver is struggling with chronic stress 
and/or mental health symptoms (Marti Castaner et al., 2021). Thus, parent-
child interventions (e.g., child-parent psychotherapy, parent-child interaction 
therapy, ARC-based parenting support) or family therapy (e.g., ecologically 
216
 * Kinnish and Hopper
based family therapy; Murnan et al., 2018) may be important therapeutic 
modalities for some trafficking survivors. Research is needed on applications 
of these models for families affected by trafficking.
Survivor Mentoring and Community Supports
Peer support and mentoring, especially connection to a survivor mentor, 
can be beneficial in building safe, supportive relationships and reducing 
shame and stigma (Ijadi-Maghsoodi et al., 2018; National Human Traffick-
ing Training and Technical Assistance Center, 2021; Rothman et al., 2020). 
Community supports, including case management services, may mitigate 
some of the negative long-term impacts of human trafficking. Successful 
community integration has been shown to indirectly ameliorate PTSD symp-
toms through an influence on perceived social support (Okech et al., 2018). 
Especially promising are comprehensive service models that establish levels 
of care based on individualized needs and incorporate significant case man-
agement and survivor mentoring or coaching. For example, the CHANCE 
(Citrus Helping Adolescents Negatively impacted by Commercial Exploita-
tion) program (Landers et al., 2017) provides individual and group ther-
apy for trafficked youth and their caregivers to reduce shame and isolation 
and teach practical skills, individual TF-CBT treatment to address trauma  
impacts, specialized placement, life coaches with lived experiences of com-
mercial sexual exploitation, intensive case management, and 24/7 youth and 
caregiver support access. Other helpful programs provide training or oppor-
tunities for advancement in leadership and advocacy and scaffolded devel-
opment of autonomy, confidence, and leadership (e.g., Elevate Academy, My 
Life My Choice Youth Leadership Corps).
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The complex interplay of vulnerabilities and experiences prior to and while 
being trafficked often result in significant mental health effects for survivors. 
Effective mental health intervention requires trauma- and trafficking-informed  
application of a full continuum of intervention skills. It begins with engage-
ment and establishment of a quality therapeutic alliance that especially priori-
tizes safety, trust, empowerment, and collaboration, to counter the trafficking 
survivor's previous experiences of threat, harm, coercion, manipulation, 
and deception. Trauma-informed psychological assessment with trafficking 
survivors utilizes conventional approaches and tools to better understand 
a client's current functioning and to guide treatment planning, as well as  
Trauma-Informed Intervention With Survivors of Human Trafficking * 
217
enhances client engagement and promotes self-awareness and effective copings.  
Treatment with trafficking survivors should be trauma-informed, culturally 
responsive, developmentally adapted, collaborative, and responsive to indi-
vidual client needs and preferences, while being informed by the best avail-
able research to guide treatment decision making. This includes evidence 
regarding the effectiveness of specific treatment approaches with trafficking  
survivors as well as the effectiveness of interventions addressing primary mental 
health impacts (e.g., PTSD symptoms and other trauma-related impacts) with 
related populations.
The development, application, adaptation, and evaluation of interven-
tions to address complex human problems and support positive change is 
perhaps clinical psychology's greatest potential contribution to the traf-
ficking field. There are a number of mental health interventions with an 
emerging evidence base with survivors of trafficking and many treatment 
models and intervention strategies that show promise in addressing the 
needs of this population. However, more work is needed in the development 
of effective interventions, and more outcome research is needed on existing 
treatment approaches. This includes more outcome research utilizing EBTs 
specifically with survivors of trafficking, greater study of trafficking-specific 
adaptations of these approaches, and more refined approaches to identi-
fying factors that contribute to better outcomes to inform treatment decision 
making. Interventions addressing the person in context, including treatments 
addressing relationships and interventions focusing on community reintegra-
tion, as well emerging strategies that incorporate mental health treatment 
into a broad array of services and supports, are also important and warrant 
further study.
Finally, additional research is needed that focuses on intervention with 
underserved populations, including those who have experienced labor traf-
ficking, men and boys, persons who identify as LGBTQ
+
, especially trans-
gender, survivors, individuals with substance use disorders, people from 
different racial and ethnic groups (Native American, Alaska Native, Black, 
Hispanic and Latino, Asian, and Pacific Islander survivors), immigrant, 
refugee, or forcibly displaced persons, individuals with disabilities, and 
those with comorbid severe mental illness, among others. As noted else-
where in this volume, much less is known about the experiences of labor 
trafficking survivors compared with survivors of sex trafficking. This is per-
haps especially true of their mental health treatment needs, experiences, 
and outcomes. There are multiple common features across various forms of 
trafficking, including commodification, coercive control, shame, and expe-
riences of trauma prior to, during, and subsequent to trafficking; therefore,  
218
 * Kinnish and Hopper
there are significant overlapping treatment needs between survivors of labor 
and sex trafficking. This is especially true regarding trauma impacts and 
treatment addressing these impacts, which is a primary focus of this chapter. 
However, research is needed to affirm these commonalities and to iden-
tify and articulate areas of divergence within and across trafficking experi-
ences, highlighting unique treatment needs. Policy changes are needed to 
increase funding to support development and evaluation of effective treat-
ment approaches for all survivors of human trafficking.
