E
ating disorders (EDs) are a set of disorders that affect aspects of the physi-
cal, mental, and social worlds of those struggling with them. The 
Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
 (5th ed.; 
DSM-5
; American Psychiatric 
Association, 2013) recognizes three major types of EDs, including anorexia 
nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder. According to the 
DSM-5
, 
there are three main features of 
anorexia nervosa
 (AN): (a) limiting energy 
intake resulting in extremely low body weight, (b) intense fear of weight gain, 
and (c) a disturbance in one's experience of their body image. 
Bulimia nervosa
(BN) is characterized by (a) episodes of binge eating (eating a significantly large 
portion of food, in secret, along with feeling a lack of control over eating) and 
(b) recurring inappropriate compensatory behaviors to prevent weight gain 
(e.g., use of laxatives, self-induced vomiting, excessive exercise). Both of 
these behaviors must have been occurring at least once a week for the past 
3 months. Finally, 
binge-eating disorder
 (BED) is characterized as engagement 
in compulsive bouts of binge eating, paired with marked distress during or 
after the binge (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Unlike BN, BED 
does not involve inappropriate compensatory behaviors. AN, BN, and BED 
are all similar in that they each involve a disturbance in the experience of 
one's weight or shape (Cook-Cottone & Lampard, 2017). EDs that are below 
diagnostic thresholds for AN, BN, or BED can be classified as "other speci-
fied feeding or eating disorders" or "unspecified feeding or eating disorders" 
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). The 
International Classification of 
Diseases for Mortality and Statistics
 (11th rev.), lists similar features of AN, BN, 
and BED (World Health Organization, 2018).
PREVALENCE
Although EDs typically are diagnosed in later adolescence and early adult-
hood, symptoms have been shown to develop at much earlier ages (Rohde, 
Stice, & Marti, 2015). Between 1999 and 2006, there was a 119% increase in 
hospitalizations among children and adolescents presenting with EDs (Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2009). Increases in EDs may be explained 
by the cultural emphasis on dieting and weight loss in these age groups due 
to the prevalence of childhood obesity (Haines & Neumark-Sztainer, 2006). 
In a U.S. national survey of 10,000 adolescents aged 13 to 18, approximately 
0.3% met diagnostic criteria for AN, 0.9% met criteria for BN, and 1.6% met 
criteria for BED (Swanson, Crow, Le Grange, Swendsen, & Merikangas, 2011). 
Notably, about 5% to 10% of EDs occur in males (Rosen, 2010). These esti-
mates may be lower than in actuality because those with subthreshold EDs 
and those who failed to report accurately are not accounted for (Cook-Cottone 
& Vujnovic, 2017). Therefore, a more accurate prevalence rate of EDs among 
adolescents may be between 0.8% to 4.6% (Stice, Marti, Shaw, & Jaconis, 
2009; Swanson et al., 2011). Although the onset of EDs is often in older ado-
lescents (Swanson et al., 2011), some research shows that body weight and 
shape concerns have been seen in females as young as 6 years old (Smolak, 
2011). Similarly, findings show that in elementary-aged females, 40% to 60% 
reported having weight-related concerns (Smolak, 2011). With body image 
concerns spanning throughout the formative years of schooling, the school 
environment can be a place of prevention through the use of evidence-based 
wellness initiatives, such as yoga and yogic principles, within the daily struc-
ture of schools.
ETIOLOGY
It is theorized that ED behavior develops over time as individuals work to 
negotiate both their internal needs and experiences (i.e., physical, emotional, 
cognitive) while also meeting the challenges and perceived expectations 
present in their external world (i.e., family, friends, community, culture; 
Cook-Cottone, 2006, 2015a; Cook-Cottone & Kane, 2013). This is especially 
true for school-aged children. Internally, they may feel negative affect, 
physical changes related to puberty and growth, and substantial cognitive 
challenges as they move from concrete thinking to more formal or con-
ceptual understanding of the world around them. At the same time, there  
are many media and cultural messages about how the body should look 
and feel, that teens and young people should look effortlessly perfect and 
Yoga for the Prevention of Eating Disorders
 303
happy, and that they should be successful socially as well as academically. 
ED symptoms may be an attempt to self-regulate in the absence of effective 
tools and practices (Cook-Cottone, 2015b). Cognitions begin to center on the 
narrative of food and body control as a pathway to mood regulation and 
happiness (e.g., "I will be okay when a get to my ideal weight"). Through 
restriction of food intake, bingeing, purging, and excessive exercise there is an 
attempt to control the size and shape of the body and as well as to control 
and/or avoid negative emotions (Cook-Cottone, 2015b). Authentic connection 
to the body is lost, and any attunement between mind and body is in service 
of symptoms and maintenance of the disorder (Cook-Cottone, 2015b).
The result is a loss of positive embodiment, which may be one of the primary 
causes of risk and a key to prevention and intervention (Cook-Cottone, 
2015b, 2017). 
Embodiment
 refers to using the body as a source for emotions, 
cognitions, and actions (Cook-Cottone, 2015a; Cook-Cottone & Guyker, 
2018; Khoury et al., 2017). The body is our sensing, experiencing, and acting 
system, our interface between our inner and outer worlds, and how we 
experience the body, perceive it, identify with it, treat it, and move from it is 
an aggregation of both our internal and external experiences (Cook-Cottone, 
2015b). It is theorized that awareness of and connection with the body  
is prerequisite to and part of embodiment and maintenance of well-being 
(Cook-Cottone, 2015a, 2015b; Ogden & Fisher, 2015).
YOGA FOR THE PREVENTION OF EATING DISORDERS
Change in the mind-body relationship requires more than a cognitive 
reframing--it must be lived and experienced (Cook-Cottone, 2015b; 2016; 
Ogden & Fisher, 2015). This has already been acknowledged in ED research; 
methods used in ED prevention research have been interactive and are based 
on a cognitive or behavioral theory to promote behavior and attitude change 
(Ciao, Loth, & Neumark-Sztainer, 2014). Further, many of the comprehensive 
prevention programs promote moderate to heavy physical activity (Ciao et al., 
2014). However, interactions and physical activity may be qualitatively distinct 
from physical practices designed to promote embodiment (e.g., yoga; Cook- 
Cottone, 2015b). Interventions, such as yoga, that facilitate a healthy mind 
and body integration are being studied for both treatment and prevention of 
EDs. Yoga is a physical practice that allows for active integration of internal 
and external experiences (Flynn, 2013). This chapter discusses the evidence 
for using yoga as an ED prevention method for children and adolescents 
and outlines the application of yoga within the school environment.
Through yoga, children and adolescents can be taught how to navigate 
their external lives through accessing their inner selves. To effectively pre-
vent EDs, children and adolescents must learn how to negotiate the stresses 
and challenges in any given moment without disconnecting from their inner 
experiences or turning against the body (Cook-Cottone, 2016). Yoga has 
304 
Talebkhah and Cook-Cottone
ancient roots in the Eastern hemisphere (see Cook-Cottone, 2017, for a 
brief history of yoga and yoga in schools). Yoga taught in schools today 
shares the main tenet of connection of the mind and body through the 
practice of postures (
asana
s), relaxation (
savasana
), meditation (
dhyana
), and 
breath work (
pranayama
; Cook-Cottone, 2015b, 2017; Serwacki & Cook- 
Cottone, 2012). These practices work simultaneously, interweaving the 
physical stretching, strengthening, and relaxation of the muscles through 
each posture with mindful breathing and relaxation exercises and work 
with sensations, feelings, and thoughts through meditation practice (Scime 
& Cook-Cottone, 2008). Through practice, the body, through the mind-body 
connection, becomes a resource for self-regulation and calming (Scime & 
Cook-Cottone, 2008).
Yoga has been gaining ground in research relating to the treatment and 
prevention of EDs among youth, including minority youth (Carei, Fyfe- 
Johnson, Breuner, & Brown, 2010; Cook-Cottone, Jones, & Haugli, 2010; 
Cook-Cottone, Talebkhah, Guyker, & Keddie, 2017). It has been hypothesized 
that yoga facilitates positive embodiment by encouraging participants to focus 
on the poses and their breath (i.e., their experiences), rather than having their 
mind be dominated by food-related thoughts (e.g., judgments; Carei et al., 
2010). By moving mindfully into poses, working on stretching, physical 
balance, and attention to breath, yoga provides opportunities for participants 
to gain self- and body awareness through direct experience of the body and 
bodily sensations (Daubenmier, 2005). Theory and emerging research have 
suggested that positive embodiment through self- and body awareness is a 
critical step in cultivating resilience to and counteracting symptoms of EDs 
(Cook-Cottone, 2015a, 2015b; Mahlo & Tiggemann, 2016). Notably, these 
benefits may be unique to yoga; other forms of exercise have not been 
shown to have the same psychological and physical effects (Martin, Prichard, 
Hutchinson, & Wilson, 2013; Prichard & Tiggemann, 2008).
Using yoga for the prevention of EDs is based on the theoretical frame-
work of positive psychology (Cook-Cottone & Lampard, 2017; Steck, Abrams, 
& Phelps, 2004). Intentionally, positive psychology works by promoting 
healthy attitudes and positive self-perceptions, rather than emphasizing risk 
factors and psychoeducation, which has been found to be a weak prevention 
strategy in schools (Carter, Stewart, Dunn, & Fairburn, 1997; Steck et al., 
2004). Positive psychology interventions follow a broaden-and-build frame-
work (Fredrickson, 2013; Garland et al., 2010). The broaden-and-build 
theory of positive emotions asserts that positive emotions, such as happi-
ness, broaden an individual's awareness and increase the likelihood of the 
individual experiencing novel, varied, and exploratory thoughts and actions. 
It is believed that this broadened behavioral experience builds both skills 
and resources. In yoga, it is not only what you do but also how you do it that 
makes all the difference. All practices provide a sense of joy, compassion, 
equanimity, and loving-kindness (i.e., the four immeasurables; Cook-Cottone, 
2015b, 2017).
Yoga for the Prevention of Eating Disorders
 305
RESEARCH ON YOGA FOR THE PREVENTION  

OF EATING DISORDERS
Currently, research on yoga for the prevention of EDs is in its nascent stage. 
However, there are some promising results from studies completed with 
school-aged populations. One such program is Girls Growing in Wellness 
and Balance (GGWB). Designed in 2002, it is the only yoga-based program 
that has been studied extensively in schools as a prevention for EDs (Cook- 
Cottone & Kane, 2013; McVey, Tweed, & Blackmore, 2007; Yager, Diedrichs, 
Ricciardelli, & Halliwell, 2013; see Holt & Ricciardelli, 2008, for a review). 
GGWB focuses on yoga, relaxation, psychoeducation, and interactive activities 
specific to ED risk factors and correlates (Cook-Cottone, 2017). The program 
uses the framework of positive psychology, focusing on helping adolescents 
build skills and strengths for the enhancement of positive embodiment and 
personal agency (Cook-Cottone & Kane, 2013). This prevention program 
curriculum includes the yoga teaching tools (e.g., breath work, emotion and 
body awareness); active practice of yoga; psychoeducational content, cultural 
media influences (media literacy), and body image concerns; and cognitive 
dissonance work in which the participants create and disseminate their own 
healthy-body magazine filled with content that counters media ideals and 
messages (see GGWB manual; Cook-Cottone & Kane, 2013). The yoga prac-
tice allows for active practice of positive embodiment, which is unique to the 
GGWB program.
First, each of the 14 sessions of the GGWB group follows the same format: 
yoga practice, interactive and creative engagement in psychoeducational 
content, journaling, and relaxation or meditation (Cook-Cottone & Kane, 
2013). Over the 14 sessions, the GGWB curriculum is organized in three  
sections: (a) Me, (b) Me in My World, and (c) Me in This Culture. The first 
section, Me, delivers content on basic coping skills (e.g., breath work),  
balancing of internal and external demands, mindful eating, identification  
of emotions, and self-care (Cook-Cottone & Kane, 2013). The second section, 
Me in My World, addresses interpersonal skills such as assertiveness and  
setting boundaries. The third section, Me in This Culture, reviews the roles 
and expectations of women in our culture, media portrayals of women, and 
personal beliefs about the media. This section also involves the construction 
of a group magazine portraying health and wellness for women that is later 
disseminated in a manner that is selected by the participants. Groups often 
deliver it to the entire grade at school or send it to a publisher that portrays 
women in a way the group does not identify with (Cook-Cottone & Kane, 2013).
The GGWB has been studied for over a decade. Research has indicated that it 
lowers ED risk factors and decreases some ED behaviors (Cook-Cottone, Jones, 
& Haugli, 2010; Cook-Cottone, Talebkhah, et al., 2017; Scime & Cook-Cottone, 
2008). In a series of noncontrolled, controlled, and matched-controlled 
studies, the GGWB prevention program showed decreases in levels of drive 
for thinness and body dissatisfaction among fifth-grade girls who participated 
in the program (Cook-Cottone et al., 2017). In a matched-controlled study, 
306 
Talebkhah and Cook-Cottone
Cook-Cottone et al. (2010) found the results to be stable across race and 
ethnicity while controlling for body mass index and socioeconomic status. 
Across studies, there tended to be no significant change in compensatory 
behaviors (e.g., purging and excessive exercise). This is consistent with other 
prevention research and is thought to be due to the young age of the partici-
pants and low baseline rates of these behaviors (Cook-Cottone et al., 2017; 
Scime & Cook-Cottone, 2008; Stice & Shaw, 2004).
Other GGWB findings have included increased rates of self-care behaviors 
found to be associated with body esteem and reduced risk of ED behaviors in 
community samples (Cook-Cottone et al., 2017). Specifically, Cook-Cottone 
et al. (2017) showed participation in the GGWB prevention program to be 
related to significant improvements in self-care behaviors of 5th-grade females 
compared with controls. Self-care behaviors found to increase in the inter-
vention group compared with controls included significant reports of increased 
nutrition (e.g., eating three balanced meals a day, taking vitamins), increased 
ability to take care of one's responsibilities (e.g., completing schoolwork and 
other housework), and increased ability to be safe with their bodies (e.g., not 
engaging in self-harm or allowing others to mistreat them; Cook-Cottone et al., 
2017). These changes are not unlike those seen in adult yoga programs, 
where healthy eating is supported in the yoga participants, but not in the 
controls (Martin et al., 2013).
The field of positive body image has evolved substantially over the past  
15 years. Rather than target EDs directly, many professionals are interested in 
the role body image plays in ED risk and other adolescent issues such as 
mood, sexual decision making, agency, and assertiveness. Recent findings in 
a small controlled study suggest that intentionally structured yoga participation 
may support positive body image among adolescents. Focusing on body image 
among adolescents, Cox, Ullrich-French, Howe, and Cole (2017) examined the 
effects of 12 weeks of a pilot yoga-based physical education (PE) curriculum 
by testing for change in trait body surveillance, physical self-worth, and body 
appreciation. Innovating the research design, they also examined the relation-
ships among change in body image variables and the role of state mindfulness 
in predicting state body surveillance during classes. Cox et al. found signifi-
cant, moderate decreases in trait body surveillance and minimal nonsignifi-
cant increases in physical self-worth among those in the yoga-based PE class 
(
n
=
 20; 
M
age
=
 16.45, 90% female) compared with traditional (
n
=
 23; 
M
age
=
14.52, 57% female) PE. Interestingly, change in trait body surveillance was 
inversely related to change in physical self-worth and body appreciation in 
yoga participants. Further, multilevel modeling analyses revealed that more 
mindful students also surveyed their body less during class (Cox et al., 2017).
RESEARCH ON YOGA AS A TREATMENT FOR EATING DISORDERS
There is also growing evidence that yoga may be a helpful adjunct in the treat-
ment of EDs (Klein & Cook-Cottone, 2013). Cook-Cottone, Beck, and Kane 
(2008) found that a yoga-based group helped those in treatment with an 
Yoga for the Prevention of Eating Disorders
 307
ED show decreased drive for thinness and body dissatisfaction over 6 to 8 weeks. 
McIver, O'Halloran, and McGartland (2009) randomized 90 women meeting 
criteria for BED to a yoga or wait-list control group and found that the yoga 
group showed a self-reported reduction in binge eating and an increase in 
physical activity compared with controls. In a randomized controlled trial (RCT), 
Carei et al. (2010) found that when compared with standard care, those who 
took part in yoga and standard care demonstrated overall greater decreases in 
ED symptoms from pre- to posttest and decreases in food preoccupation 
following each yoga session. Pacanowski, Diers, Crosby, and Neumark-Sztainer 
(2017) conducted an RCT within a residential ED treatment program. Partici-
pants were randomized to control or yoga intervention: 1 hour of yoga before 
dinner for 5 days. Negative affect was assessed pre- and postmeal. Yoga sig-
nificant reduced pre-meal negative affect compared with treatment as usual. 
The effect was attenuated postmeal. Overall, these findings suggest that yoga 
is safe to be practiced by those struggling with EDs.
LIMITATIONS
Some limitations to yoga as a prevention for EDs have been noted in the 
literature. In a study of yoga-based ED prevention among college-age women, 
Mitchell, Mazzeo, Rausch, and Cooke (2007) randomized 93 women to a 
dissonance intervention, yoga, or a control group. Although outside of the 
K-12 age range, this study illustrates an important aspect of yoga-based inter-
ventions: dosage. In the Mitchell et al. study, the dissonance group was found 
to have significantly lower scores than the yoga group and the control group 
on measures of disordered eating, drive for thinness, body dissatisfaction, 
alexithymia, and anxiety. Further, the yoga group did not differ at post- 
intervention from the control group on these measures. In a review of research 
on yoga-based prevention and treatment of EDs, Klein and Cook-Cottone 
(2013) suggested that the yoga dosage used by Mitchell et al. of 45 minutes 
per week over 6 weeks was insufficient for change. Cook-Cottone (2013) 
suggested a frequency of two or more times per week for 60 to 90 minutes 
(with at least 45 minutes of yoga practice if combined with psychoeducation) 
and a duration of more than 6 weeks for significant impact. Further, the 
body of research on yoga interventions has suggested that internalization 
of the practice as evidenced by home practice and continued practice after 
completion of the program may also be important (Cook-Cottone, 2013). 
To date, dosage issues have yet to be studied for yoga-based ED prevention 
programs. Also, although studies have suggested that yoga may be a help-
ful adjunct to therapy, much more research is needed to understand how 
best to align the yoga with treatment at various levels (e.g., inpatient, day 
treatment, or outpatient). In addition, the appropriate dosage must also  
be identified to provide the most optimal chance of lowering risk and ensur-
ing recovery.
308 
Talebkhah and Cook-Cottone
TIERED DELIVERY MODEL
In the past, ED prevention in the schools used a didactic, psychoeducational 
framework only, leading to initial drops in ED risk; however, long-term effects 
were ineffective and, at times, even harmful (Carter et al., 1997). Now it  
is recommended that prevention methods be theoretically based, focused 
on decreasing risk and increasing protective factors (Scime & Cook-Cottone, 
2008). Aligning all aspects of yoga (e.g., postures, relaxation, meditation, 
breath work) with the main tenets of positive psychology, namely, positive 
subjective experiences, individual traits, and focus on personal well-being, 
meaning, and quality of life (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000), the school 
environment has the capacity to be an environment for ED prevention. Cook- 
Cottone, Tribole, and Tylka (2013) provided a comprehensive framework for 
a three-tier prevention intervention in schools in their text 
Healthy Eating in 
Schools: Evidence-Based Intervention to Help Kids Thrive
.
It is important to note that caring for a child with an ED calls for a multi- 
intervention approach. Although yoga can make a paramount difference in 
correcting the way children view themselves by assisting in the connection 
between their internal and external worlds (Klein & Cook-Cottone, 2013),  
it should not be used as the sole intervention for regaining health and well- 
being. As outlined in the case study at the end of this chapter, mental health 
professionals, ED specialists, and medical checkups should be used as well.
Tier 1: Yoga-Based Universal Interventions
The goal in universal prevention for EDs in schools is to cultivate resilience 
and decrease risk among the entire student body, in hopes of leading to 
long-lasting resilience against body image issues and weight-related concerns 
(McVey et al., 2007; Serwacki & Cook-Cottone, 2012). Scime and Cook- 
Cottone (2008) proposed that universal prevention should occur in elemen-
tary schools and early middle school because this is often before body-image 
and weight-related concerns begin to crystallize. Programs emphasizing healthy 
eating and physical activity, body acceptance, media literacy, and increased 
coping and self-care are recommended as efficacious for preventing EDs 
(Cook-Cottone, 2009; McVey et al., 2007; Yager et al., 2013). Yoga may be 
offered as a school-wide program, with all students participating as a means 
of fulfilling the social-emotional learning program within the school district 
(Cook-Cottone, 2017). Because the practice of yoga is associated with increased 
body awareness, understanding one's unique body cues such as hunger, sati-
ation, and even moods may improve and become more regulated within 
these universal sessions. Universal prevention programs include specific class 
time dedicated to yoga (i.e., yoga classes) both during and after school, as well 
as yoga mini-sessions, workshops, and breaks during class to help students 
learn to self-regulate through movement and breath (e.g., movement to get 
engaged and breath work to calm; Cook-Cottone, 2017). See Cook-Cottone 
and Douglass's (2017) article, "Yoga Communities and Eating Disorders: 
Yoga for the Prevention of Eating Disorders
 309
Creating a Safe Space for Positive Embodiment," for a set of guidelines on 
how best to use language, interactions, and yoga practices to support positive 
embodiment.
Aside from the physical practice of yoga, yogic principles could be easily 
incorporated into the school atmosphere to create a healthy environment for 
reducing ED risk. For example, appearance-based teasing and conversations 
about weight loss from school personnel in front of or with students could 
be suspended under a zero-tolerance policy (Cook-Cottone, Tribole, & Tylka, 
2013; Puhl, Neumark-Sztainer, Austin, Luedicke, & King, 2014). This would 
allow students to foster an attitude of acceptance toward their bodies, rather 
than an attitude of comparison or desire for change--an important principle 
in yoga. Similarly, healthy eating habits can be reinforced by offering healthy 
options for school lunches, along with the integration of nutritional knowl-
edge, coping skills, and self-care behaviors in health and science classes 
(Cook-Cottone, Tribole, & Tylka, 2013). Proper nutrition and healthy eating 
are related to the ability to self-regulate, which can be a protective factor 
against ED risk (Cook-Cottone, Tribole, & Tylka, 2013). Breath work has also 
been explored in schools, with Schonert-Reichl and Lawlor (2010) examining 
the feasibility of incorporating a few minutes of attention to the breath in the 
school day.
Last, yoga practice can also be offered through a set of cognitive guidelines. 
Cook-Cottone (2017) offered 
12 Practices of Embodied Growth and Learning
, 
which were sourced from the body of literature on yoga and mindfulness 
in schools. These are embodied, mindful principles that can be adapted in 
schools as universal and subtle but powerful ways of increasing a child's 
ability to recognize, manage, and regulate both internal and external factors. 
Briefly, the principles are split into three mechanisms of action: (a) mindful 
embodiment, including principles of worth, breath, awareness, presence, and 
feeling; (b) embodied self-regulation, including principles of inquiry, choice, 
self-determination, and sustainability; and (c) mindful growth, including 
principles of compassion, kindness, and possibility (see Exhibit 20.1; Cook- 
Cottone, 2017). By reminding students of these principles, teachers and other 
school personnel can instill elements of the yogic tradition into the classroom 
and within the student. A complete, comprehensive review of these principles 
and specifics on how to apply them in the classroom can be found in 
Mindful-
ness and Yoga in Schools
 (Cook-Cottone, 2017).
Tier 2: Yoga-Based, Target Interventions
Students who continue to show risk of EDs, such as diet-related behaviors 
(e.g., weight loss, excessive exercise, dieting, and/or purging), body image 
distress and appearance-focused behaviors (e.g., monitoring body parts by 
constantly touching or looking at stomach, thighs, arms, chin, etc., or com-
paring self with others), should be targeted for Tier 2 intervention to correct 
budding ED attitudes as early, quickly, and effectively as possible. Referrals of 
such students can come from multiple sources, such as teachers, other school 
310 
Talebkhah and Cook-Cottone
personnel, the school psychologist, and even concerned parents and friends 
(Cook-Cottone & Lampard, 2017). Students in middle or high school may be 
particularly at risk because this is the time when ED attitudes and behaviors 
begin to crystallize and take shape in adolescence (Scime & Cook-Cottone, 
2008). Tier 2 programs should be targeted, focused on decreasing ED risk fac-
tors and correlates. This should be done in small groups of eight to 12 students 
who have been referred due to concerns associated with ED risk: dieting, fat 
talk, exposure to weight-related teasing, body dissatisfaction, thin-ideal inter-
nalization, higher body mass, and negative affect (Cook-Cottone, Tribole, & 
Tylka, 2013). GGWB is an example of an appropriate Tier 2 program.
Tier 3: Indicated Programs and Interventions
Students who require Tier 3 attention for ED prevention have already begun 
experiencing symptoms of AN, BN, or BED (Cook-Cottone & Vujnovic, 2017). 
At this point, they require an individualized intervention strategy that matches 
their particular needs (Stoiber & Gettinger, 2016). This usually requires an 
interdisciplinary team approach within the school in coordination with medi-
cal and psychological professionals. Treatment for EDs is typically conducted 
using a team approach with a medical doctor, nutritionist, and mental health 
professional all specializing in the treatment of EDs (Cook-Cottone, Tribole, & 
Tylka, 2013). Because the best outcomes for clinical levels of EDs occur when 
interventions are secured early in the onset of a disorder, all schools should 
have a point person who is comfortable with and knowledgeable about the 
disorders (Yager & O'Dea, 2005). Along with conducting proper screening 
EXHIBIT 20.1
The 12 Principles for Embodied Growth and Learning
Mindful embodiment
* 
Worth: I am worth the effort.
* 
Breath: My breath is my most powerful tool.
* 
Awareness: I am mindfully aware.
* 
Presence: I work toward presence in my physical body.
* 
Feeling: I feel my emotions to grow and learn.
Embodied self-regulation
* 
Inquiry: I ask questions about my physical experiences, feelings, and thoughts.
* 
Choice: I choose my focus and actions.
* 
Self-determination: I do the work.
* 
Sustainability: I find balance between effort and rest.
Mindful growth
* 
Compassion: I honor efforts to grow and learn.
* 
Kindness: I am kind to myself and others.
* 
Possibility: I work toward the possibility of effectiveness and growth in my life.
Yoga for the Prevention of Eating Disorders
 311
and making appropriate referrals, this person can also be a body positive role 
model within the school, which research has shown to be crucial in the 
crystallization of ED attitudes (Yager & O'Dea, 2005).
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
It is most important to remain inclusive in any attempts of incorporating 
yoga into the schools. Diversity includes race, ethnicity, socioeconomic  
status, the location and characteristics of the school and neighborhood, ability 
levels, skills and challenges, sexuality, gender identity, personal history and 
trauma, religion, body size and shape, family and neighborhood values, 
family educational backgrounds, and many other variables and qualities 
(Rechtschaffen, 2014). A common, beautiful phrase about yoga is "Yoga is for 
every body." The basic tenets of diversity and inclusion apply, of course, in that 
all children should be provided a safe space to be heard, valued, and celebrated. 
Yoga can align with these tenets. Inclusion in all aspects of yoga--postures, 
breath work, relaxation and meditation--can be adapted for and modified to 
the individual needs of each student. Remember this, and engage in continu-
ous learning when you feel you need extra training in cultural competence, 
diversity, and inclusion. For example, Childress and Harper (2015) offered 
a comprehensive guide for making yoga inclusive and accessible in their 
book, 
Best Practices for Yoga in Schools.
 Also, the National Education Association's 
(2019) "Diversity Toolkit: Cultural Competence for Educators" can be accessed 
to further one's knowledge on addressing diversity within the classroom.
CASE EXAMPLE SHOWING APPLICATION  

OF THE INTERVENTION
Mattie is a biracial, eighth-grade girl who does well in school, plays the violin, 
and presents as social and happy. Teachers frequently describe her as a plea-
sure to have in class and as engaged in positive peer relations. She is normal 
weight. Her mother, a dental assistant, is a chronic dieter, and her younger 
sister has always been a picky eater and is below the 25th percentile for 
weight. Her father, a dentist, is a normal weight and has never been diagnosed 
with any mental illness. However, his side of the family has a history of depres-
sion and substance use. Her middle school does not have a universal yoga 
program, and Mattie has never practiced yoga. She does not like her body, 
wishing she was smaller. She also does not like her hair and saves her money 
from babysitting and chores for hair extensions. She also struggles in PE class 
and is often chosen last by her peers when they play as teams.
Over the summer, Mattie stayed for 2 weeks with her paternal grand-
mother, who drinks alcohol daily and is quite critical of people. Each night 
after she had a few drinks, she told Mattie that Mattie would look so much 
better if she lost a few pounds. She would also tell Mattie things about her 
312 
Talebkhah and Cook-Cottone
personal life and Mattie's father's life that were overwhelming for Mattie to 
hear. Mattie had nowhere to go and did not know how to stop her grand-
mother. She would sit and listen and wish she were somewhere else. She 
never told her parents about it because she was afraid they would get upset. 
It was then that she decided to go on a diet. She began to secretly follow her 
mom's latest diet plan emphasizing protein and eliminating dairy and carbo-
hydrates. Mattie has been slowly losing weight. At first, it was just one or 
two pounds a month. However, in December and January, she lost four and 
five pounds each month and has now lost a total of 13 pounds, a substantial 
weight loss for someone who as within the normal range. A group of her 
friends went to the school psychologist, Dr. Cruize, to tell her that they were 
concerned about Mattie's eating habits.
Dr. Cruize met with Mattie and asked her to take the Eating Attitudes Test 
(https://www.eat-26.com), a widely used standardized self-report measure of 
symptoms and concerns characteristic of EDs. Mattie's score indicated that 
she was at risk. The interview revealed that Mattie had been feeling stressed 
and overwhelmed at school and did not want anyone to know how sad she 
was feeling. Dr. Cruize referred Mattie to the GGWB group that was beginning 
the following week as well as to the local ED specialist for further screening 
and a medical checkup. Ultimately, Mattie was treated by an interdisciplinary 
team that included a medical doctor, nutritionist, and psychologist who spe-
cialized in the treatment of eating disorders. She had weekly appointments 
with her nutritionist and psychologist and biweekly check-ins with the med-
ical doctor.
Mattie loved learning the breathing skills for self-regulation in group. 
During each group, they practiced grounding their feet and using their bodies 
as a resource for calming and focusing. She had never felt so empowered. The 
yoga helped her to feel the difference between feeling stressed and tensing 
your muscles and feeling relaxed and softening your muscles. She learned 
poses and skills for how to strengthen and relax her muscles. During group 
work, in the section on feeling feelings and then again during the section on 
setting limits, Mattie wrote in her journal about what had happened the past 
summer with her grandmother. The group leader encouraged her to talk to 
the psychologist about these feelings in her next session. Mattie felt as if there 
was a team of people that cared about her well-being. Her diet became less 
important to her as her body and feelings shifted from something that she 
needed to control to resources she could use. She was going to use the tools 
she learned in yoga group to help her tell her parents that she did not want 
to stay at her grandmother's alone again and why.
CONCLUSION
EDs are difficult to treat, affecting individuals' relationship with their body 
and food. Risk factors include a drive for thinness, internalization of the  
thin ideal, difficulty with negative affect, body mass, and body dissatisfaction. 
Yoga for the Prevention of Eating Disorders
 313
Embodiment is disrupted as the body becomes an object that is judged, mea-
sured, and weighed. Behaviors such as food restriction, overeating, bingeing, 
purging, and compensatory exercise complicate eating and hydration, creating 
further dysregulation. Attunement between the mind and body is lost, and 
those who struggle can no longer effectively take care of their body, respond 
to emotions, and evaluate and select cognitions and behaviors.
Prevention programs focus on cognitions and integrate interactive curricular 
content to engage those at risk in activities that create cognitive dissonance 
related to media ideals, encourage healthy eating behaviors and exercise, and 
help kids process emotions. However, only yoga-based programs focus specifi-
cally on the body and how to engage the body as a resource in self-regulation. 
Using yoga as a part of a school's three-tier prevention programming can help 
prevent EDs and support all students in their use of the body as a resource  
for self-regulation. Further, research has suggested that yoga can also be an 
effective Tier 2 and 3 intervention for the prevention and treatment of EDs. 
See Cook-Cottone (2017); Cook-Cottone and Kane (2013); and Cook-Cottone,  
Tribole, and Tylka (2013) for more resources and how to implement yoga as 
a prevention intervention in your schools.
